                                                     LoRA Soups: Merging LoRAs for Practical
                                                            Skill Composition Tasks


                                                 Akshara Prabhakar∗                    Yuanzhi Li                Karthik Narasimhan
                                            Department of Computer Science          Microsoft Research       Department of Computer Science
                                                 Princeton University                                             Princeton University
arXiv:2410.13025v2 [cs.CL] 2 Dec 2024




                                                 Sham Kakade, Eran Malach                              Samy Jelassi
                                                     Kempner Institute                 Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications
                                                     Harvard University                              Harvard University



                                                                                         Abstract
                                                    Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is a popular technique for parameter-efficient fine-
                                                    tuning of Large Language Models (LLMs). We study how different LoRA modules
                                                    can be merged to achieve skill composition—testing the performance of the merged
                                                    model on a target task that involves combining multiple skills, each skill coming
                                                    from a single LoRA. This setup is favorable when it is difficult to obtain training
                                                    data for the target task and when it can be decomposed into multiple skills. First, we
                                                    identify practically occurring use-cases that can be studied under the realm of skill
                                                    composition, e.g. solving hard math-word problems with code, creating a bot to
                                                    answer questions on proprietary manuals or about domain-specialized corpora. Our
                                                    main contribution is to show that concatenation of LoRAs (CAT), which optimally
                                                    weights LoRAs that were individually trained on different skills, outperforms
                                                    existing model- and data- merging techniques; for instance on math-word problems,
                                                    CAT beats these methods by an average of 43% and 12% respectively. Thus, this
                                                    paper advocates model merging as an efficient way to solve compositional tasks
                                                    and underscores CAT as a simple, compute-friendly and effective procedure. To our
                                                    knowledge, this is the first work demonstrating the superiority of model merging
                                                    over data mixing for binary skill composition tasks.†


                                        1       Introduction
                                        Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in conversational tasks
                                        and general-purpose applications, such as writing emails or answering common questions. However,
                                        these general purpose LLMs may have restricted performance on tasks where specific skills and
                                        knowledge is required. We primarily focus on skill composition tasks, that necessitate the integration
                                        of multiple skills.
                                        Many industrial applications fit in this framework. Consider a company that manufactures ovens and
                                        is trying to design a chatbot to answer customer queries about its working and specifics. Directly
                                        using a frontier LLM (like gpt-4o) would fail since it lacks knowledge about the company’s product.
                                        The ideal solution here would be to design an instruction dataset consisting of question-answer pairs
                                        about this product and fine-tuning an LLM on it. However, such a data collection and annotation
                                        procedure is expensive. Another possible solution is to fine-tune an LLM on a collection of product
                                        manuals and then impart it chat abilities by further fine-tuning on an instruction-tuning dataset like
                                            ∗
                                                Corresponding author <akshblr555@gmail.com>
                                            †
                                                Code and data are available at https://github.com/aksh555/LoRA-Soups.


                                        Short version in COLING 2025 (Industry track).
       DATA Mixing                 LoRA Linear Merge                   Learnable Concatenation 
         (DATA)                       (TIES, DARE)                              (CAT)                                                                                                               21.83
                                                                                                                                                                     21.11
                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                        18.8
 skill 1              skill 2   skill 1                skill 2        skill 1                       skill 2

                                                                                                                                                                             15.77
                                                                                                                                                14.18                                14.78
                                                                                                                                                                                             13.5




                                                                                                              Accuracy (%)
            100%
      skill 1 + skill 2
                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                         8.04

                                           optional                                    5%                                         5.91
                                                                                    skill 1 + 
                                          processing                                 skill 2                                  5                                4.1

                                                           modified                              learned

                                     [       +         ]                   [          ,           ]                           0
                                                                                                                                  Base   Code   Math    DATA LoRA    CAT     TIES    DARE    MoECodeLlama
                                                                                                                                                              Hub                                  7B




                                                                                                                             (b) Performance of different meth-
           output                          output                                   output
                                                                                                                             ods on solving hard math-word
       (a) Comparison of CAT with DATA-MIX and Linear methods.                                                               problems with code.
                    Figure 1: Method and performance overview of Learnable Concatenation (CAT).


Alpaca [55]. We refer to this method as DATA-MIX. Besides this approach being sequential, it suffers
from catastrophic forgetting [28]. Whenever the company creates a new product, they need to redo
fine-tuning on this data mixture or create a new question-answer dataset for the former method.
In this paper, we study model merging as an alternative approach. Given a model that is fine-tuned
on the manuals and one that possesses question-answering capabilities, we optimally combine their
weights to obtain a model that can answer product-specific questions. This approach is more efficient
since we merge skill-specific fine-tuned models without any additional data collection or training
from scratch. Among the multiple techniques to perform model merging, our framework specifically
builds on LoRA [23] (a review of the LoRA method is in Appendix A), a fine-tuning technique that
consists of adding a low-rank update to a few layers in the model. In this context, model merging
consists of combining the LoRA weights from different models.
Prior works [19, 49, 70] have investigated LoRA merging in computer vision where each skill is a
visual concept or style and the objective is image generation. On the other hand, natural language
tasks are more challenging since identifying the skills needed for solving a task is not always clear.
On natural language tasks, most prior works [5, 14, 37, 43, 62] merged LoRAs with the objective
of multitask learning. In this setting, the individual LoRA modules are trained on (potentially)
independent tasks and the merged model is tested on the original tasks. A successful model retains
the skills of each individual LoRA. Differently, Huang et al. [24] devise LoraHub, a strategy to merge
LoRAs for cross-task learning. By finetuning LoRAs on FLAN [35], they achieve performance
equivalent to few-shot prompting on some Big-Bench Hard (BBH) tasks [54]. Closer to our work,
Akiba et al. [2] merge specialized LMs in Japanese and in math [11] to solve word-math problems in
Japanese [50]. Though this can be viewed as a skill composition task, they focus on studying only
one such task, and their contribution is an evolutionary algorithm for merging models.
Given LoRAs trained on specialized domains (biology, math, code, reading comprehension, question-
answering), is it possible to merge them to effectively solve a new problem that requires a combination
of these domains?
We underline that most settings we consider are out-of-domain since the specialized LoRAs have
been trained on datasets that are very different from the target task. To our knowledge, this is the first
paper exhibiting model merging is superior to data mixing for binary skill composition problems.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
– In Section 3, we define the skill composition problem and show some practical applications in
  domains spanning code, science, robustness, and in-house use cases.
– We introduce Learnable Concatenation (CAT), a LoRA merging technique that involves a simple
  weighted average of the encompassed skill LoRAs. While concatenating LoRAs as a technique
  already exists, our contribution lies in cheaply learning the weights layer-wise and applying this to
  compositional natural language tasks.
– In Section 5, we perform a comprehensive evaluation of several baselines and demonstrate that
  CAT achieves better binary skill composition than both existing merging methods and data mixing.


                                                                                2
– In Section 6, we discuss some limitations of our approach. Our main limitation is that we focus on
  skill composition problems that require 2 skills and an interesting direction would be to extend this
  to more skills.

2     Related Work
Merging methods. The traditional approach to learning multiple skills/tasks simultaneously is
joint training on a mixture of task datasets [7]. Over the years, several works have improved this
multi-task learning approach [41, 53, 48, 20, 38, 9, 48]. As data collection for specialized tasks,
and training large models from scratch get more expensive; coupled with the rapid expansion in the
availability of well-trained open-source models – model merging has emerged as a convenient way of
building powerful models from existing ones [17, 32]. The richly studied simplest way of merging
by averaging model weights [57, 52, 16, 26] paved the way to linear weight averaging [60]. Some
methods like Fisher Merging [39] and RegMean [27] need training data based pre-computations to
measure individual parameter importance but these are highly memory and data intensive. Expanding
on weight averaging, Task Arithmetic [25] involving the creation and combination of task vectors
facilitated multi-task learning. While this weight interpolation was heavily used for merging image
generation models, recent methods like TIES [67] and DARE [2] reset redundant parameters, resolve
sign conflicts, and exclusively merge parameters that exhibit sign-consistency, and SLERP [59]
by spherical linear interpolation build upon this for language models. In all these methods, the
coefficients governing the model merging are determined by trial-error; while works in the vision
domain demonstrate the pivotal role played by these coefficients [68]. In contrast to the cumbersome
grid-searching, our method CAT learns these coefficients layer-wise with access to very few examples
in the natural language domain.
LoRA merging methods. PEM composition [73] adopts the task arithmetic framework to incorpo-
rate the merging of LoRAs. Recently, the vision community witnessed the widespread application
LoRAs [5, 14, 37, 43, 62, 75, 69] as an effective approach to multi-task learning and composing
styles and subjects [49]. Many of these utilize Mixture of Experts (MoE) [5, 14, 37, 62] based
architectures having input-dependent learnable routers. These models have been primarily used in
the context of multitask learning. Apart from multi-task learning [25, 33, 66, 62, 14, 68], merging
models have served various use cases – ensembling to improve generalization on the target task
[26, 3, 21], federated learning [40], model compression [34]. In this work, we study LoRA model
merging for skill composition tasks.

3     Setting
3.1   Skill composition

Most of the downstream tasks used to evaluate LLMs require mastering multiple skills to be solved.
Skill here refers to specific capabilities that the LLM needs for customization to downstream use
cases. These skills can be acquired from knowledge source like textbooks and manuals or from
foundational datasets designed for arithmetic, coding, etc. For instance, achieving high score in
the GSM8k benchmark [11] requires good commonsense reasoning and arithmetic skills. In this
paper, we focus on downstream tasks where composition can be ensured and isolated, and we mainly
focus on tasks that require two skills. Skill composition is challenging because, not only does the
model need to “know” the different skills, but it also needs to understand the appropriate context
for applying each skill. We now present some skill composition examples of practical interest and
Table 1 summarizes them.
                                                                         Math-word problems using code
Hard math-word problems. Prior works noticed              Instruction: Grandma Jones baked 5 apple pies. She cuts
that when fine-tuning a large language model on           each pie into 425558 pieces ans set the 5 pies on on the
GSM-8k [11], the resulting model performs poorly          buffet table for the guests. After the guests had eaten their
                                                          pieces, there were 14 pieces of pie remaining.
on GSM-Hard [15], a dataset that gathers similar
                                                          Question: How many pieces were taken by the guests?
problems but with more complex arithmetic opera-
tions. The program-aided approach by Gao et al. [15]      Solution:

is one solution to address this issue: the LLM reads
the GSM problem and generates programs as the in-
termediate reasoning steps, but offloads the solution


                                                   3    Figure 2: An example of solving hard word-math
                                                        problem using code.
step to a Python interpreter. In this case, the model
must excel in both mathematical skills to first reason about the problem and also coding skills to
translate its reasoning to code. Therefore, in order to improve the accuracy on GSM-hard, we set the
first skill to be MetaMathQA [71] – an augmented version of the GSM-8k dataset and the second
skill to be Code-Alpaca [8].

QABot on proprietary manuals. Chat models are                          Closed-Book question answering bot
language models that aim to facilitate conversational       Question: What are the proficiencies of a Barbarian in
interactions. Similarly to LLMs, they are first pre- terms of armor, weapons, and saving throws?
trained on large language datasets. Then, they are          Solution: A Barbarian is proficient in light armor, medium
finetuned on instruction-tuning datasets [10, 12, 30, armor, shields, simple weapons, martial weapons, and has
55, 63, 64, 76]. While general-purpose chatbots are         saving throws for Strength and Constitution.
useful, an institution or corporation may desire to
have a specialized question-answering bot/assistant Figure 3: An example of question-answering task
that addresses domain-specific questions. Examples based on Dungeons & Dragons game manual.
of this case may be a university that wants a bot that
answers questions about quantum physics or a refrigerator retailer that wants a bot to answer questions
about their last device. The aforementioned approach may fall short since when fine-tuning a chat
model on a specialized document, it may lose its conversational abilities. Another solution would be
to obtain an instruction-tuning dataset that covers the specialized material but this may be too costly.
On the other hand, model merging seems to be a convenient solution to address this problem: we train
one LoRA model on a general instruction-tuning dataset and another one on the specialized document.
Therefore, we set the first skill to be the Alpaca dataset [55] and study two cases where the second
skill is: (1) a molecular biology university textbook [4] from https://bio.libretexts.org/ and
(2) a manual of the "Dungeons and Dragons" game [22].

Reading comprehension on technical documents.                             Open-Book reading comprehension
Medical reports and law contracts are very chal-
lenging to read for non-specialist users: they are                Context: Recent functional genetic studies have pointed
                                                                  out that LKB1 plays a physiological role in controlling the
usually very long and involve a myriad of techni-                 Wnt-signaling pathway and activation of the pathway as
cal jargon. Having a language model that can read                 a consequence of LKB1 haploinsufficiency might be
these documents and answer questions would be                     responsible for the development of harmatomatous
very useful. For this reason, we train one LoRA                   polyps. PJS polyps from all patients showed generalized
                                                                  membrane and cytoplasmic localizations of beta-catenin
model on SQuAD [45] to acquire the reading com-                   along the mucosal endothelium.
prehension skill and another LoRA on open-source
                                                                  Question: What is the physiological role of LKB1 involved
biology textbooks [18, 29, 44, 51] collected from                 in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome?
https://libretexts.org. We test our models on
                                                                  Solution: controlling the Wnt-signaling pathway
the BioASQ-QA dataset [31], a reading comprehen-
sion dataset on biomedical engineering.
                                                                Figure 4: An example of the reading comprehen-
                                                                sion task in the biomedical domain.
3.2   Merging methods

Figure 1a details the various merging methods in the literature and the proposed CAT method.

Data mixing (DATA-MIX). The naive approach for solving these tasks is to train on a mixture of
datasets containing different skills. This method does not merge models but merges datasets. We
fine-tune a single model with LoRA weights (A, B) where A, B ∈ Rd×kr on the concatenation of
datasets and thus simultaneously teach the k skills to the model. Data mixing is a very expensive
approach in practice. Indeed, whenever we want to add a new skill to the model, we need to retrain
the model on an updated mixture of datasets. Model merging offers a solution to this problem. We
train one model per skill and then merge all of them to solve the compositional task. We set the rank
to kr (and not r) in order to ensure a fair comparison with the other merging methods.
Next, we review the different merging schemes and report their skill composition performance in the
next sections. We distinguish two main classes of LoRA merging techniques: the concatenation of
LoRAs and the linear merging of LoRAs. These two methods differ in whether we linearly combine
the parameters or the LoRA updates.


                                                          4
Concatenation of LoRAs. This method consists of a linear combination of the LoRA updates i.e.
∆W l = α1l B1 A⊤       l     ⊤           l    l
                 1 + α2 B2 A2 , where α1 , α2 ∈ [0, 1] are merging coefficients for layer l. We refer to
this method as concatenation of LoRAs. In what follows, we study three variants of this method that
differ by their merging coefficients definition:

       – Learnable concatenation (CAT) (introduced in this paper): in this variant, we set α1l , α2l
         as trainable parameters. This distinguishes us from other methods like TIES, DARE, LoRA
         Hub that learn static values for every layer l of the network. Once the LoRA modules are
         separately trained, we add a step where we only train the merging coefficients on a small
         mixture of the datasets.
       – Mixture of Experts (MoE) [5, 14, 37, 43, 62]: the main difference of this method compared
         to the previous ones is that the merging coefficients are input-dependent. Indeed, we have a
         trainable router parameter Wrl ∈ Rd×2 which computes the logits hl (x) = Wrl⊤ x. Then,
         the merging coefficients are defined as:
                                              l                          l
                                            eh (x)1                   eh (x)2
                               α1l =     l          l    , α2
                                                             l
                                                               =
                                       eh (x)1 + eh (x)2         eh (x)1 + ehl (x)2
                                                                   l




Linear merging of LoRAs. This method consists of a linear combination of the LoRA parameters
i.e. ∆W l = (α1l B1 + α2l B2 )(α1l A1 + α2l A2 )⊤ . We note that all these methods use the same static
weights (α1 , α2 ) for every layer. Compared to the concatenation of LoRAs, this method involves
additional cross-terms. In what follows, we study three variants of this method that apply a series of
preprocessing steps on the LoRA parameters before applying the update.

       – TIES [67]: we prune the smallest values of (Ak , Bk ) for k ∈ {1, 2} and retain the top
         values based on the specified density fraction λ ∈ [0, 1]. Then, we calculate the majority
         sign mask from the pruned LoRA weights by summing all their parameter values and storing
         the sign of this sum. Lastly, the LoRA weights are multiplied by weights (α1 , α2 ). Finally,
         we apply the linear merging update based on the stored majority sign. Here, (λ, α1 , α2 ) are
         hyper-parameters.
       – DARE [72]: we first randomly prune the values of the LoRA parameters (Ak , Bk ) for
         k ∈ {1, 2} based on a density λ ∈ [0, 1]. Then, we rescale the pruned LoRA weights by
         1/λ. Finally, we apply the linear merging update. Here, (λ, α1 , α2 ) are hyper-parameters.
       – LoRA Hub [24]: this method was primarily proposed to select and assign weights to the
         constituent LoRA modules that would help solve an unseen test task. Here (α1 , α2 ) are
         learned from a few (5) examples from the target task in a gradient-free manner.

Most of these aforementioned methods have been introduced in the literature for solving the multitask
problem, i.e. to perform well simultaneously on k skills, when tested independently. In this paper, we
study how these methods perform in skill composition.

4    Experimental details
Skill Finetuning. Our base model is a Llama-7b [56] and set the LoRA rank r =
32, LoRA alpha = 64, LoRA dropout = 0.05 and the target modules to be
{"q_proj", "v_proj", "k_proj", "up_proj","down_proj"}. We finetune the individual
LoRAs using AdamW [36] for 3 epochs, with a learning rate 3e−4, 100 warmup steps, a linear
decaying schedule, batch size in {4, 8} and gradient accumulation 4. We set the precision to float16.
Our loss is the standard next-token prediction loss. When finetuning on the instruction datasets, we
mask the instruction so that we only penalize wrong token predictions at the level of answers. When
finetuning on textbooks, we do not apply any masking. We followed the implementation of mergoo
[32] for MoE which is based on recent MoE for LoRAs [14, 6].

DATA-MIX. For DATA-MIX, we train LoRA modules with a rank 2r = 64, to ensure an equal
number of trainable parameters with the merging methods. For LoRA Hub, we used at least 5 few-
shot examples for learning the weights. Training a model on a mixture of datasets in Subsection 5.3,
Subsection 5.2 is not straightforward, as different examples have different masking schemes, which
makes standard data mixing fail. When training with alternating between one batch of each dataset


                                                    5
 Task                    Skills Composed                  Test Dataset                            Evaluation Metric
 Hard math-word          {math, code}                     GSM-Hard [15] (1319)                    Exec. Accuracy
 Question-answering      {biology/game, closed-book QA}   Open-source book/manual §B.2 (95)       Accuracy (GPT-4)
 Reading comprehension   {biomedical, open-book QA}       BioASQ-QA [31] (200)                    Elo Rating (GPT-4)
 Prompt robustness       {prompti , promptj }             SuperNaturalInstructions [58] (417)     Accuracy

 Table 1: Rundown of our skill-composition tasks, source of test datasets, and evaluation criterion.

type we observed poor performance. Hence, we perform continual training by fine-tuning for 3
epochs on the chapter/manual, merge the weights with the pre-trained model weights, followed by 1
epoch of fine-tuning on the instruction-following dataset (SQuAD/Alpaca) similar to [61].

CAT. We freeze the trained LoRA skill modules and train α1l , α2l on a dataset made by selecting
the minimum of 5% of the data points from both skill 1 and skill 2. This additional step only runs
for 1 epoch with a learning rate of 1e−4. The best model is chosen as the one that does best on the
validation set.

Hyperparameters. The (λ, α1 , α2 ) hyperparameter values for TIES, DARE are chosen by doing
a sweep over λ ∈ [0, 1], α1 ∈ [1, 2], α2 ∈ [1, 2] in increments of 0.2 and we report the best results.
At inference time, we generate answers in an autoregressive fashion setting temperature to 0.01,
max_new_tokens to 200, with nucleus sampling probability top_p as 0.95.
Table 1 summarizes our skill composition tasks, dataset sources, and evaluation criterion. Further
training details and compute used are presented in Subsection B.1.

5     Experiments
5.1     Super-linear improvement when solving GSM-Hard with code

Evaluation setup. We evaluate the ability to solve            Question: Gunter is trying to count the jelly beans in
                                                              a jar. He asks his friends how many they think are in
hard math-word problems in GSM-Hard using code.               the jar. One says 9926805. Another says 20 more
The model takes in a math word problem, mathe-                than half the first one. A third says 25% more than the
matically reasons, and then outputs a corresponding           first one. What is their average guess?
Python function whose return value is the answer to                                   DATA                        error

the problem. We run this solution in the Python in-
terpreter and use it to test. This setup is motivated by
the fact that while finetuning a single LoRA on Meta-
MathQA yields 55% accuracy on the standard GSM-
8k, the performance on GSM-Hard is much lower at
14.18%. Though GSM-Hard and GSM-8k problems                                           CAT
share the same structure, they differ in the more com-
plex arithmetic operations involved in GSM-Hard,
due to which access to a calculator-like tool aids per-
formance.

Baselines. Base (Llama-7b with 8-shot PAL); Skill Figure 5: CAT vs. DATA solving a GSM-Hard
LoRAs: Math (trained on MetaMath) with 8-shot problem. DATA makes frequent coding errors.
PAL, Code (trained on Code Alpaca). DATA-MIX
(trained on [MetaMath; Code Alpaca]); LoRA Merg-
ing: TIES, DARE, MoE.

Results. Figure 1b illustrates that finetuning on the concatenation of MetaMathQA and Code-
Alpaca – which corresponds to the DATA strategy is effective since the accuracy increases by 32%
over Math (from 14.18% → 18.8%) and the model effectively exploits the synergies between natural
and programming language [65]. However, we note that DATA does not always conform to outputting
code despite 8-shot PAL prompting, while model merging methods do so ≥ 99% times.
Regarding model merging, Yadav et al. [67] and Yu et al. [72] report that TIES and DARE are worse
than DATA in the multitask setting. We observe that this finding also holds in the skill composition
of math and code. Lastly, CAT is the best method on GSM-Hard; Figure 5 shows a qualitative


                                                      6
example comparing CAT to the next best method DATA. Additionally, despite being fine-tuned on a
relatively much smaller general code dataset i.e. Code Alpaca, it matches the performance of Python
specialized Code Llama - Python 7b [46], which highlights the effectiveness of linearly combining
LoRA updates.

Super-linear improvement. Table 2 demonstrates
                                                                         No Code             Code
that with CAT, we achieve a super-linear improve-
ment on GSM-Hard. The performance improvement              No Math         5.91%         8.04% (+36%)
when finetuning on both math and code with respect         Math      14.18% (+140%) 21.11% (+257%)
to the base model (257%) is superior to the sum of
                                                           Table 2: Super-linear improvement with CAT.
the improvements on code only (36%) and math only
(140%). We note that such super-linear improvement essentially proves that the merged model is
able to leverage the capabilities of the individual models when solving some of the problems. Indeed,
if Math solves 8% more problems than the base model, and Code solves 2% more problems, then
the total number of problems solved by both models is at most 10% more than the original model,
with a total of 16% solved problems‡ . The merged model, however, solves 21% of the problems,
meaning that at least 5% of the problems it solves are not solved by either of the individual models.
The solution to these problems must therefore arise from combining the knowledge of both models.

5.2       Building specialized question-answering bots (QABots)

Evaluation setup. We test the closed-book question-answering capability (i.e. no access to the
book/manual about which questions are asked) by considering two settings: (1) simple – university
biology textbook chapter, (2) hard – nuanced Dungeons & Dragons game manual. Details on the
preparation of the dataset and judging are discussed in Subsection B.2, Subsection C.2. In contrast to
Subsection 5.3, this is closed-book QA as we have access to the context during inference.

Baselines. Skill LoRAs: Biology/Manual (trained on textbook/manual), Alpaca (trained on
Alpaca). Apart from the usual LoRA merging baselines, we include two additional relevant
ones: retrieval using langchain based RetrievalQAChain retrieval using (1) Llama-7b and
(2) Llama2-7b-chat models. Here the documents are embedded using sentence transformer
sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2 and stored in a FAISS vector store. These are
indeed open-book but are included to benchmark merging methods and get an upper bound.
                                                                        80                                                                 78
Results. Figure 6 shows the performance on                                                                                           69
                                                                        70
the harder game setting. We observe that CAT
beats most merging and data mixing but we note
the scope for improvement compared to retrieval
                                                         Accuracy (%)




methods. Here as well, we note the greater need                                                                                39
for having the instruction-following skill than                                                             32
                                                                                                                        30
                                                                        30
the game knowledge due to Alpaca’s superior                                                    25
                                                                                                     21           19
performance; as well as from Llama-chat beat-                           20
                                                                                         12
ing base Llama. Again this highlights how com-                          10
posing the two skills boosts performance. The                            0
                                                                              1     2

results on the simpler biology chapter setting are                           Base Manual Alpaca DATA Lora
                                                                                                     Hub
                                                                                                            CAT   TIES DARE MoE Retrieval Chat
                                                                                                                                       +retrieval

provided in (Subsection C.2, Figure 10).                 Figure 6: Performance on closed-book game QA.

5.3       Reading comprehension on technical documents

Evaluation setup. We test the open-book question-answering ability (i.e. context is accessible to
the model) on BioASQ by choosing the “factoid” subset of questions to align with the format of
questions seen in SQuAD and restricting to examples whose “Context” field is less than 500 tokens.
Indeed, we observed that the model suffers from length generalization: when the context length is
much larger than the one seen during training, the model does not output any answer. Since the
ground truth answers in BioASQ are very long and sometimes contain more details than what is
provided in the context, we observe low results in exact matching and F1 scores (see Subsection C.3
      ‡
     We make the reasonable assumption that the finetuned models are solving new problems, but not degrading
the performance on the problems already solved by the base model.


                                                     7
                                    Model B: Loser                                                                                                             Context: Using a system in which only a single EYFP-
                      tex          DA                                                                                                                          linked PML isoform is expressed, we demonstrate
                         tbo SQu DA TA-M    Mo TIE  CA                                                                                                         that PMLI, PMLII and PMLVI accumulate in the
                            ok AD RE     IX   E   S   T
                                                                                                                                                               cytoplasm following arsenic treatment, whereas
                   textbook 0.00 0.17 0.00 0.13 0.17 0.10 0.09   0.6            300 289.47                                                                     PMLIII, PMLIV and PMLV do not. The PML isoforms that
                                                                                             269.81

                    SQuAD 0.56 0.00 0.21 0.07 0.18 0.12 0.15                    250
                                                                                                      245.27                                                   are most sensitive to virus infection correspond
                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                               closely to those which have recently been identified
Model A: Winner



                                                                                                               205.12
                     DARE 0.61 0.36 0.00 0.23 0.24 0.18 0.21
                                                                 0.4            200
                                                                                                                         194.52
                                                                                                                                  180.1
                                                                                                                                                               as being covalently conjugated to PIC1.
                                                                                                                                                               Question: How many of the human PML isoforms are




                                                                       Rating
                  DATA-MIX 0.58 0.32 0.29 0.00 0.23 0.14 0.16
                                                                 0.3
                                                                                150
                                                                                                                                                               cytosolic?
                      MoE 0.58 0.45 0.40 0.33 0.00 0.23 0.26
                                                                 0.2
                                                                                100                                                                            SQuAD: ‘Not in context’
                      TIES 0.67 0.45 0.35 0.30 0.24 0.00 0.21
                                                                                 50                                                                            MoE: PMLI, PMLII and PMLVI accumulate in the
                       CAT 0.68 0.43 0.42 0.39 0.25 0.24 0.00    0.1
                                                                                                                                               15.72           cytoplasm following arsenic treatment, whereas
                                                                                  0                                                                            PMLIII, PMLIV and PMLV do not.
                                                                                      CA       Mo       TIE      DA        DA        SQ         tex
                                                                 0                      T         E        S        RE       TA
                                                                                                                                -M
                                                                                                                                   IX
                                                                                                                                        uA
                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                   tbo
                                                                                                                                                      ok       CAT: Three
                                                                                                               Model
                                                                                                                                                           (c) Answers generated by CAT,
                    (a) Pairwise win ratio of                                    (b) ELO Ratings of models                                                 MoE, and model trained on SQuAD
                    Model A w.r.t. Model B.                                      on reading comprehension.                                                 when asking a BioASQ question.
                                         Figure 7: Quantitative and qualitative results on reading comprehension task.
                    Table 3). To alleviate this issue, we use GPT-4 as a judge [74]: given the answers generated by a pair
                    of models, we ask it to score the two in terms of relative correctness to the gold reference answer.
                    This gives a table that records all the pairs of methods, the number of ties, and wins by each model.
                    We report the pairwise win fractions (the ratio of a model’s wins over 200 questions) and the ELO
                    rating [13] (see Subsection C.3 for prompts and more details).

                    Results. Figure 7 reports the pairwise win fractions and ELO ratings obtained by the different
                    methods on BioASQ. Again, we observe that CAT is the best method both in terms of pairwise win
                    fraction and ELO ratings. Evidently, the question-answering skill is more useful than having domain
                    knowledge as SQuAD fairs 6× better compared to textbook. From Figure 7c we see the lack of
                    biomedical knowledge hurting SQuAD; how CAT gives well-formed answers compared to MoE
                    which is indeed able to understand the context but just copies relevant text. The other methods are
                    worse and the merging methods beat DATA-MIX. As in the previous experiment, we use continual
                    learning for the DATA-MIX experiment.

                    5.4        LoRA merging improves robustness to prompt format changes

                    Problem. Recently, a few works [42, 47] reported
                    the sensitivity of language models to prompt format-
                    ting. These works report performance differences
                    of up to 76 accuracy points due to subtle changes in
                    prompt formatting when using LLaMA-2-13B [56].
                    This sensitivity remains when increasing model size,
                    the number of few-shot examples, or performing in-
                    struction tuning. We investigate whether model or
                    data mixing is a solution to this problem. Therefore,
                    we set the first skill to be the dataset with format i
                    and the second skill to be the dataset with format j
                    and evaluate the merging methods on a dataset with Figure 8: Different prompt formats – varying
                    format k, where i, j, k ∈ {1, . . . , 10} and i ̸= j ̸= k. descriptors, separators, and spaces for the same
                                                                                                                                  task example.
                    Evaluation setup. We choose task_131 of count-
                    ing the number of words having a particular letter in the given sentence from Super-NaturalInstructions
                    [58]. Following the grammar over descriptors, separators, and spaces defined in [47], we sample 7
                    prompt formats (see Figure 8 for some examples of format variations – as simple as spacing, casing).
                    The descriptors refer to the format of {Sentence, Answer}, separators refer to the separator between
                    the descriptor and the example, and space referees to the dividing character between the descriptors.
                    We train on 6000 examples and test on 417.

                    Results. Figure 11 reports the performance of each model when evaluating on 4 out-of-distribution
                    formats (Formats 3, 7, 8 and 10). Figures 11a, 11b and 11c respectively display the single and merged
                    models when trained on Formats 1&4, Formats 1&2 and Formats 2&4. A well-performing merged
                    model should perform at least as well as the individual models i.e. the models trained on a single


                                                                                                                    8
format. Remarkably, data mixing performs poorly, even worse than the individual models. Regarding
the merged models, the results are variable. When finetuning on Formats 1&4 (Figure 11a), the
performance of CAT does not vary across target formats and remains high. TIES performance is
also high contrary to DARE. On Formats 1&2 (Figure 11b), TIES is the best model since it performs
as the single model when evaluated on Formats 3 and 10. CAT and DARE perform worse and only
obtain a decent performance when evaluated on Format 3. Lastly, on Formats 2 & 4, merging fails
since all the models perform poorly. Thus, we show that model merging is an approach to attaining
robustness to prompt formatting changes.

5.5   Ablations
                                                                                 math+code           qabot
                                                                                                             33
Learning the weights of CAT. We analyze the im-
                                                                           30
pact of learning the weights to be assigned to each
                                                                                                25
skill. As discussed in Section 4, we learn the merging




                                                            Accuracy (%)
                                                                                        21.1
coefficients. In this section, we demonstrate that this                    20   19.1

learning entails a significant performance improve-
ment. Figure 9 shows how that “learned” CAT beats                          10
“static” CAT in the GSM-Hard experiment and the
QAbot experiment (on the game manual). In this
case, we simply average – set α1l , α2l = 0.5.




                                                                                          ed




                                                                                                             ed
                                                                                 ic




                                                                                                ic
                                                                                          rn




                                                                                                            rn
                                                                                at




                                                                                               at
                                                                                       lea




                                                                                                         lea
                                                                                st




                                                                                               st
                                                          Figure 9: Performance of the learned vs static
6     Limitations & Future Directions                     approach in CAT.

Our work is a first step towards using model merging
for solving skill composition tasks. Our study is
limited to settings where the number of needed skills k = 2. Extension to a higher number of skills
is challenging for two reasons: (1) Identifying practical settings that need a large number of skills
that can be clearly identified is difficult. (2) Even if we find such settings, it remains unclear whether
LoRA merging is effective. To test a hypothetical situation, we consider the prompt robustness
experiment from Subsection 5.4 and report the performance of the different baselines when trained
on 3 different prompt formats. This time, we observe that all the LoRA merging baselines perform
worse than DATA-MIX (refer Subsection C.4 Figure 12). This suggests that when the number of
skills is large, DATA-MIX is still the best strategy for skill composition. Improving current model
merging schemes is an important future direction for getting an efficient composition of many skills.


7     Conclusion

We conclude that when obtaining training data is challenging, decomposing a task into its underlying
skills and model merging is a promising approach. We demonstrate several practical use cases that can
be treated as binary skill composition problems. We show that methods based on the concatenation of
LoRAs achieve the best skill composition and outperform the popular data mixing method. Another
highlight of our analysis is the super-linear modularity results from Subsection 5.1 which shows
that the model is effectively able to compose the math and code skills to solve new problems. As
mentioned in Section 6, an exciting future direction is to design merging methods that would enable
to composition of more than two skills. This would give an interesting alternative to the current
paradigm where we train large-scale models on curated datasets; instead we could merge specialized
LoRAs to obtain an equivalently good model.


References
 [1] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida,
     J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

 [2] T. Akiba, M. Shing, Y. Tang, Q. Sun, and D. Ha. Evolutionary optimization of model merging
     recipes, 2024.


                                                    9
 [3] D. Arpit, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, and C. Xiong. Ensemble of averages: Improving model selection
     and boosting performance in domain generalization. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 35:8265–8277, 2022.
 [4] G. Bergtrom. Basic cell and molecular biology 5e: What we know and how we find out. 2022.
 [5] E. L. Buehler and M. J. Buehler. X-lora: Mixture of low-rank adapter experts, a flexible
     framework for large language models with applications in protein mechanics and design. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2402.07148, 2024.
 [6] E. L. Buehler and M. J. Buehler. X-lora: Mixture of low-rank adapter experts, a flexible
     framework for large language models with applications in protein mechanics and molecular
     design, 2024.
 [7] R. Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28:41–75, 1997.
 [8] S. Chaudhary. Code alpaca: An instruction-following llama model for code generation. https:
     //github.com/sahil280114/codealpaca, 2023.
 [9] Z. Chen, V. Badrinarayanan, C.-Y. Lee, and A. Rabinovich. Gradnorm: Gradient normalization
     for adaptive loss balancing in deep multitask networks. In International conference on machine
     learning, pages 794–803. PMLR, 2018.
[10] W.-L. Chiang, Z. Li, Z. Lin, Y. Sheng, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Zheng, S. Zhuang, Y. Zhuang, J. E.
     Gonzalez, I. Stoica, and E. P. Xing. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%*
     chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
[11] K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek,
     J. Hilton, R. Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[12] M. Conover, M. Hayes, A. Mathur, J. Xie, J. Wan, S. Shah, A. Ghodsi, P. Wendell, M. Zaharia,
     and R. Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open instruction-tuned llm. Company
     Blog of Databricks, 2023.
[13] A. E. Elo and S. Sloan. The rating of chessplayers: Past and present. (No Title), 1978.
[14] W. Feng, C. Hao, Y. Zhang, Y. Han, and H. Wang. Mixture-of-loras: An efficient multitask
     tuning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03432, 2024.
[15] L. Gao, A. Madaan, S. Zhou, U. Alon, P. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Callan, and G. Neubig. Pal: Program-
     aided language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10764–10799.
     PMLR, 2023.
[16] T. Garipov, P. Izmailov, D. Podoprikhin, D. P. Vetrov, and A. G. Wilson. Loss surfaces, mode
     connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. Advances in neural information processing systems,
     31, 2018.
[17] C. Goddard, S. Siriwardhana, M. Ehghaghi, L. Meyers, V. Karpukhin, B. Benedict, M. McQuade,
     and J. Solawetz. Arcee’s mergekit: A toolkit for merging large language models, 2024.
[18] M. Grewal and S. Wakim. Human biology. 2023.
[19] Y. Gu, X. Wang, J. Z. Wu, Y. Shi, Y. Chen, Z. Fan, W. Xiao, R. Zhao, S. Chang, W. Wu, et al.
     Mix-of-show: Decentralized low-rank adaptation for multi-concept customization of diffusion
     models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[20] P. Guo, C.-Y. Lee, and D. Ulbricht. Learning to branch for multi-task learning. In International
     conference on machine learning, pages 3854–3863. PMLR, 2020.
[21] V. Gupta, S. A. Serrano, and D. DeCoste. Stochastic weight averaging in parallel: Large-batch
     training that generalizes well. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02312, 2020.
[22] G. Gygax and D. Arneson. dungeons & dragons, volume 19. Tactical Studies Rules Lake
     Geneva, WI, 1974.


                                                 10
[23] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen. Lora:
     Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

[24] C. Huang, Q. Liu, B. Y. Lin, T. Pang, C. Du, and M. Lin. Lorahub: Efficient cross-task
     generalization via dynamic lora composition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13269, 2023.

[25] G. Ilharco, M. T. Ribeiro, M. Wortsman, S. Gururangan, L. Schmidt, H. Hajishirzi, and
     A. Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04089, 2022.

[26] P. Izmailov, D. Podoprikhin, T. Garipov, D. Vetrov, and A. G. Wilson. Averaging weights leads
     to wider optima and better generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05407, 2018.

[27] X. Jin, X. Ren, D. Preotiuc-Pietro, and P. Cheng. Dataless knowledge fusion by merging weights
     of language models, 2023.

[28] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins, A. A. Rusu, K. Milan,
     J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska, D. Hassabis, C. Clopath, D. Kumaran, and
     R. Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1611835114.
     URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1611835114.

[29] M. Klymkowsky, M. Cooper, and O. T. Library. Biofundamentals 2.0. Open textbook library.
     Michael Klymkowsky, Melanie Cooper. URL https://books.google.com/books?id=
     q837wQEACAAJ.

[30] A. Köpf, Y. Kilcher, D. von Rütte, S. Anagnostidis, Z. R. Tam, K. Stevens, A. Barhoum,
     D. Nguyen, O. Stanley, R. Nagyfi, et al. Openassistant conversations-democratizing large
     language model alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

[31] A. Krithara, A. Nentidis, K. Bougiatiotis, and G. Paliouras. Bioasq-qa: A manually curated
     corpus for biomedical question answering. Scientific Data, 10(1):170, 2023.

[32] Leroo-AI. Leeroo-AI/mergoo. 2024. URL https://github.com/Leeroo-AI/mergoo.

[33] M. Li, S. Gururangan, T. Dettmers, M. Lewis, T. Althoff, N. A. Smith, and L. Zettlemoyer.
     Branch-train-merge: Embarrassingly parallel training of expert language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2208.03306, 2022.

[34] P. Li, Z. Zhang, P. Yadav, Y.-L. Sung, Y. Cheng, M. Bansal, and T. Chen. Merge, then compress:
     Demystify efficient smoe with hints from its routing policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01334,
     2023.

[35] S. Longpre, L. Hou, T. Vu, A. Webson, H. W. Chung, Y. Tay, D. Zhou, Q. V. Le, B. Zoph,
     J. Wei, et al. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective instruction tuning.
     In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 22631–22648. PMLR, 2023.

[36] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.          arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

[37] T. Luo, J. Lei, F. Lei, W. Liu, S. He, J. Zhao, and K. Liu. Moelora: Contrastive learning guided
     mixture of experts on parameter-efficient fine-tuning for large language models, 2024.

[38] J. Ma, Z. Zhao, X. Yi, J. Chen, L. Hong, and E. H. Chi. Modeling task relationships in multi-
     task learning with multi-gate mixture-of-experts. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
     international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pages 1930–1939, 2018.

[39] M. S. Matena and C. A. Raffel. Merging models with fisher-weighted averaging. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17703–17716, 2022.

[40] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas. Communication-efficient
     learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pages
     1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.


                                                  11
[41] I. Misra, A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, and M. Hebert. Cross-stitch networks for multi-task learning.
     In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
     3994–4003, 2016.
[42] M. Mizrahi, G. Kaplan, D. Malkin, R. Dror, D. Shahaf, and G. Stanovsky. State of what art? a
     call for multi-prompt llm evaluation, 2024.
[43] M. Muqeeth, H. Liu, Y. Liu, and C. Raffel. Learning to route among specialized experts for
     zero-shot generalization, 2024.
[44] A. Nelson and K. Greene. Medical terminology for healthcare professions. 2021.
[45] P. Rajpurkar, R. Jia, and P. Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions for
     squad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03822, 2018.
[46] B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E. Tan, Y. Adi, J. Liu, T. Remez,
     J. Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950,
     2023.
[47] M. Sclar, Y. Choi, Y. Tsvetkov, and A. Suhr. Quantifying language models’ sensitivity to
     spurious features in prompt design or: How i learned to start worrying about prompt formatting.
     In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
     //openreview.net/forum?id=RIu5lyNXjT.
[48] O. Sener and V. Koltun. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 31, 2018.
[49] V. Shah, N. Ruiz, F. Cole, E. Lu, S. Lazebnik, Y. Li, and V. Jampani. Ziplora: Any subject in
     any style by effectively merging loras. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13600, 2023.
[50] F. Shi, M. Suzgun, M. Freitag, X. Wang, S. Srivats, S. Vosoughi, H. W. Chung, Y. Tay, S. Ruder,
     D. Zhou, et al. Language models are multilingual chain-of-thought reasoners. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2210.03057, 2022.
[51] V. Singh. Genetics. Elsevier Health Sciences, 2014.
[52] J. Smith and M. Gashler. An investigation of how neural networks learn from the experiences
     of peers through periodic weight averaging. In 2017 16th IEEE International Conference on
     Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pages 731–736. IEEE, 2017.
[53] X. Sun, R. Panda, R. Feris, and K. Saenko. Adashare: Learning what to share for efficient deep
     multi-task learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:8728–8740, 2020.
[54] M. Suzgun, N. Scales, N. Schärli, S. Gehrmann, Y. Tay, H. W. Chung, A. Chowdhery, Q. V. Le,
     E. H. Chi, D. Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve
     them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
[55] R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, X. Li, C. Guestrin, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto.
     Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/
     stanford_alpaca, 2023.
[56] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozière, N. Goyal,
     E. Hambro, F. Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[57] J. Utans. Weight averaging for neural networks and local resampling schemes. In Proc. AAAI-96
     Workshop on Integrating Multiple Learned Models. AAAI Press, pages 133–138. Citeseer, 1996.
[58] Y. Wang, S. Mishra, P. Alipoormolabashi, Y. Kordi, A. Mirzaei, A. Arunkumar, A. Ashok, A. S.
     Dhanasekaran, A. Naik, D. Stap, et al. Super-naturalinstructions:generalization via declarative
     instructions on 1600+ tasks. In EMNLP, 2022.
[59] T. White. Sampling generative networks, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=SypU81Ole.


                                                 12
[60] M. Wortsman, G. Ilharco, S. Y. Gadre, R. Roelofs, R. Gontijo-Lopes, A. S. Morcos,
     H. Namkoong, A. Farhadi, Y. Carmon, S. Kornblith, et al. Model soups: averaging weights of
     multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing inference time. In Interna-
     tional conference on machine learning, pages 23965–23998. PMLR, 2022.

[61] C. Wu, W. Lin, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Xie, and Y. Wang. Pmc-llama: toward building
     open-source language models for medicine. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
     Association, page ocae045, 2024.

[62] X. Wu, S. Huang, and F. Wei. Mole: Mixture of lora experts. In The Twelfth International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

[63] C. Xu, D. Guo, N. Duan, and J. McAuley. Baize: An open-source chat model with parameter-
     efficient tuning on self-chat data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01196, 2023.

[64] C. Xu, Q. Sun, K. Zheng, X. Geng, P. Zhao, J. Feng, C. Tao, and D. Jiang. Wizardlm: Empow-
     ering large language models to follow complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244,
     2023.

[65] Y. Xu, H. Su, C. Xing, B. Mi, Q. Liu, W. Shi, B. Hui, F. Zhou, Y. Liu, T. Xie, et al. Lemur:
     Harmonizing natural language and code for language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06830,
     2023.

[66] P. Yadav, D. Tam, L. Choshen, C. Raffel, and M. Bansal. TIES-merging: Resolving interference
     when merging models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
     2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=xtaX3WyCj1.

[67] P. Yadav, D. Tam, L. Choshen, C. A. Raffel, and M. Bansal. Ties-merging: Resolving in-
     terference when merging models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
     2024.

[68] E. Yang, Z. Wang, L. Shen, S. Liu, G. Guo, X. Wang, and D. Tao. Adamerging: Adaptive model
     merging for multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02575, 2023.

[69] Y. Yang, W. Wang, L. Peng, C. Song, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Yang, Q. Lu, D. Cai, B. Wu, and
     W. Liu. Lora-composer: Leveraging low-rank adaptation for multi-concept customization in
     training-free diffusion models, 2024.

[70] Y. Yang, W. Wang, L. Peng, C. Song, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Yang, Q. Lu, D. Cai, B. Wu, et al. Lora-
     composer: Leveraging low-rank adaptation for multi-concept customization in training-free
     diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11627, 2024.

[71] L. Yu, W. Jiang, H. Shi, J. Yu, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. T. Kwok, Z. Li, A. Weller, and W. Liu.
     Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions for large language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2309.12284, 2023.

[72] L. Yu, B. Yu, H. Yu, F. Huang, and Y. Li. Language models are super mario: Absorbing abilities
     from homologous models as a free lunch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03099, 2023.

[73] J. Zhang, J. Liu, J. He, et al. Composing parameter-efficient modules with arithmetic operation.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:12589–12610, 2023.

[74] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. Xing,
     et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

[75] M. Zhong, Y. Shen, S. Wang, Y. Lu, Y. Jiao, S. Ouyang, D. Yu, J. Han, and W. Chen. Multi-lora
     composition for image generation, 2024.

[76] C. Zhou, P. Liu, P. Xu, S. Iyer, J. Sun, Y. Mao, X. Ma, A. Efrat, P. Yu, L. Yu, et al. Lima: Less
     is more for alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                 13
A     Review on LoRA
All the methods we study for solving composition skill problems are based on LoRA [23], which
is defined as follows. During finetuning, the update of the weights are constrained to be a low-rank
decomposition i.e. the update is W0 + ∆W , where ∆W = BA⊤ , for W0 pre-trained weights,
B ∈ Rd×r and A ∈ Rd×r trainable parameters, and r ≪ d.
LoRA presents several advantages compared to standard finetuning. First, it is more parameter-
efficient i.e., it uses a lower number of trainable parameters and has a lower memory usage i.e., fewer
parameters need to be stored and processed which lowers the memory footprint. More importantly, it
is more modular i.e. LoRA’s method of isolating additional parameters makes it easier to manage
adaptations and switch between different fine-tuned tasks. It is possible to load and apply different
sets of low-rank adaptations without needing to retrain the entire model from scratch for each new
task. For these reasons, we focus on LoRA-based methods to solve skill composition problems. We
detail them in the next section.

B     Additional experimental details
B.1   Training details & computing resources.

We run our experiments on the following GPUs depending on their availability on our compute
cluster: NVIDIA RTX A6000, NVIDIA RTX A5000, and NVIDIA A100. Mainly, for the most
extensive large-scale fine-tuning of five textbooks for reading comprehension, we train the models in
a distributed multi-GPU environment using DeepSpeed on 2 A100 GPUs. This takes about 2 days.
For reading comprehension, we use a sequence length of 2048, while for question-answer we found
that using smaller lengths in {20,100} worked better at memorizing minute details.
In all data and LoRA merging methods, we do 1-shot prompting to ensure the output is of consistent
format.

B.2   Datasets introduced.

For the QABot task, we create two new datasets consisting of 95 examples (45 from the biology
textbook chapter 16 and 50 from the rules of Dungeon & Dragons manual). We extract text contents
from these to prepare the training corpus. This amounts to 8169 tokens in the case of biology and
25427 tokens for the game. To obtain question-answer pairs, we provide page-level content in the
context and use the Question-Answer generation prompt shown in Figure 13 to prompt GPT-4 [1].
This is followed by a manual inspection to ensure valid and appropriate questions.

C     Additional experiments
C.1   Math-word problems.

Since this setting requires training over smaller scale data than reading comprehension and QABot,
we conducted an evaluation to assess the robustness of the reported accuracy metric of the CAT
method. We obtain 21.63 ± 1.07 when testing with 3 different seeds. which is still greater than
DATA-MIX (18.8).
                                                                         90
C.2   QABot                                                                                                                                85



For judging, we use accuracy as the metric using the                                                                              62
QA judge prompt in Figure 13 .                                           60
                                                                                               55
                                                                                                      58
                                                                                                                          53
                                                          Accuracy (%)




Biology textbook QA. In the simpler setting of a                               38
                                                                                       43                   43     44

chapter from a university biology textbook, we see
                                                                         30
that the base Llama model that has been instruction
                                                                         20
fine-tuned on Alpaca is able to obtain 43%, which
                                                                         10
is enhanced by DATA-MIX which injects domain
                                                                          0
knowledge to 54%.                                                             Biology Alpaca   DATA   CAT   TIES   DARE   MoE Retrieval Chat
                                                                                                                                       +retrieval




                                                                          Figure 10: QABot on biology chapter.
                                                 14
    C.3    Reading comprehension

    The corpus of textbooks used to impart biomedical
    knowledge contains 1417501 tokens.
                                                                                                         Model                  F1 score
    As discussed in Subsection 5.3, since the gold refer-
                                                                    textbook (5-shot) 0.041
    ence answers in BioASQ are quite descriptive unlike             SQuAD              0.047
    the simpler/concise answers for the QABot datasets,             TIES               0.04
    the naive F1 based scoring is unable to reflect the             DARE               0.037
    true performance of models Table 3. we observed                 MoE                0.037
    that when asked to score a model individually, scores           DATA               0.044
    from GPT-4 do not capture the fine-grained details              CAT                0.028
    or consider relative generations from other models.
    Hence, we resort to pairwise scoring similar to LM-            Table 3: F1 scores on BioASQ.
    Sys. Using this scheme gives us more reliable scores.
    For ELO computation, we start with an initial rating of 200, base 10, scale 400, and K-factor 4. We
    bootstrap the ELO ratings 5000 times to ensure stable results.

    C.4    Prompt robustness

                  Format                                              Format                                                         Format
                     3                                                   3                                                              3




Format                                     Format    Format                                               Format   Format                                    Format
    10                                     7             10                                               7            10                                    7
                           20                                                       20                                                        20
                                                                                         30
                                 40                                                           40                                                   40

                                      60                                                            60                                                  60




                  Format                                              Format                                                         Format
                     8                                                   8                                                              8


            (a) Format 1&4                                      (b) Format 1&2                                              (c) Format 2&4
                         Single LoRA:                         Format 1 Format 2                          Format 4
                         Merging:                             DATA-MIX      CAT                          TIES    DARE          MoE
    Figure 11: Performance of single LoRAs and merged models trained on format pairs mentioned and tested on
    different formats.
    Prompt format robustness. In Figure 11, we see different merging methods working well for
    different format pairs trained. While we do not see a clear strategy that would guarantee robustness, it
    indicates that merging methods are capable of attaining robustness. Achieving this is a very desirable
    phenomenon as this would eliminate the need to prompt engineer by trying diverse formatting choices.

    Merging on 3 formats. Figure 12 shows the performance of various methods when 3 formats are
    combined. As we can see, DATA-MIX clearly beats the other methods across all formats tested.
                                                                     Format
                                                                        3




                                                    Format                                               Format
                                                        10                                               7
                                                                               20
                                                                                         40

                                                                                                   70




                                                                     Format
                                                                        8


                                Figure 12: Testing prompt robustness when training on 3 formats.



                                                                     15
                                  Reading comprehension judge prompt

                               Please act as an impartial judge and             Question-answer judge prompt
                               evaluate the quality of the answers.
                                                                           Please act as an impartial judge and
                               You will receive five items: Context,       evaluate the quality of the answers.
                               Question, Gold Answer, Choice 1, and
                               Choice 2. Your task is to assess which      You will receive four items: Context,
                               among Choice 1 and Choice 2 in terms of     Question, Gold Answer, and System
  Question-answer generation   CORRECTNESS. You MUST read and understand   Answer. Your task is to assess the
            prompt             the Context and assess the Choice answers   System Answer in terms of CORRECTNESS.
                               with respect to the information in the      You MUST read and understand the
<QUESTION PROMPT>              Context. To help you with evaluation,       Context and assess the System Answer
You are an expert in           we provide the Gold Answer. The Gold        with respect to the information in the
generating questions. Based    Answer has been checked by experts and is   Context. To help you with evaluation,
on the given Context, please   100% correct. Use it as a reference for     we provide the Gold Answer. The Gold
generate a question whose      spotting CORRECTNESS errors.                Answer is an approximately correct
answer lies in the Context.                                                answer. Use it as a reference for
The question should be to      You should give a score from 0 to 3 for     spotting CORRECTNESS errors but you
the point and must entail      CORRECTNESS to Choice 1 and Choice 2.       should judge based on the provided
a definite, concise answer     Half points are allowed. Then you must      Context.
in the Context. Focus on       say which choice was better.
specific points and details                                                You should give a score from 0 to 2
such that only someone who     Here is the Context:                        for CORRECTNESS to the System Answer.
understands the Context well   {context}
can answer.                    Here is the Question:                       Here is the Context:
                               {question}                                  {context}
Context:   {context}           Here is the Gold Answer:                    Here is the Question:
                               {answer}                                    {question}
<ANSWER PROMPT>                Here is Choice 1:                           Here is the Gold Answer:
You are an expert at reading   {choice1}                                   {gold_answer}
comprehension. Given the       Here is Choice 2:                           Here is the System Answer:
Context, please respond to     {choice2}                                   {system_answe}
the Question based on the                                                  Here is Choice 2:
information in the Context.    Please present your scores as follows:      {choice2}
The answer should at max be    Choice 1: x/3
one sentence long. Output      Choice 2: x/3                               Please present your scores as follows:
only the exact answer.         Choice _ is better                          Score: x


              Figure 13: Prompts used to generate questions/judge answers using GPT-4.




                                                      16
