IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

1561

The Inadequacy of Reinforcement Learning From
Human Feedback—Radicalizing Large Language
Models via Semantic Vulnerabilities
Timothy R. McIntosh , Teo Susnjak , Tong Liu , Paul Watters , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Malka N. Halgamuge , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This study is an empirical investigation into the
semantic vulnerabilities of four popular pretrained commercial
large language models (LLMs) to ideological manipulation. Using
tactics reminiscent of human semantic conditioning in psychology, we have induced and assessed ideological misalignments
and their retention in four commercial pretrained LLMs, in
response to 30 controversial questions that spanned a broad
ideological and social spectrum, encompassing both extreme leftand right-wing viewpoints. Such semantic vulnerabilities arise
due to fundamental limitations in LLMs’ capability to comprehend detailed linguistic variations, making them susceptible to
ideological manipulation through targeted semantic exploits. We
observed reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
in effect to LLM initial answers, but highlighted the limitations
of RLHF in two aspects: 1) its inability to fully mitigate the
impact of ideological conditioning prompts, leading to partial
alleviation of LLM semantic vulnerabilities; and 2) its inadequacy
in representing a diverse set of “human values,” often reflecting
the predefined values of certain groups controlling the LLMs.
Our findings have provided empirical evidence of semantic
vulnerabilities inherent in current LLMs, challenged both the
robustness and the adequacy of RLHF as a mainstream method
for aligning LLMs with human values, and underscored the
need for a multidisciplinary approach in developing ethical and
resilient artificial intelligence (AI).
Index Terms—Artificial intelligence (AI) alignment, AI safety,
ideological misalignment, large language model (LLM), reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) inadequacy,
semantic conditioning.

Manuscript received 16 October 2023; revised 14 January 2024; accepted
12 March 2024. Date of publication 18 March 2024; date of current version
13 August 2024. (Corresponding author: Timothy R. McIntosh.)
Timothy R. McIntosh is with Cyberoo Pty Ltd., Surrey Hills, NSW 2010,
Australia (e-mail: tim.mcintosh@cyberoo.au).
Teo Susnjak and Tong Liu are with Massey University, Auckland 0632,
New Zealand (e-mail: t.susnjak@massey.ac.nz; t.liu@massey.ac.nz).
Paul Watters is with Cyberstronomy Pty Ltd., Ballarat, VIC 3350, Australia
(e-mail: ceo@cyberstronomy.com).
Malka N. Halgamuge is with RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3000,
Australia (e-mail: malka.halgamuge@rmit.edu.au).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCDS.2024.3377445, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCDS.2024.3377445

I. INTRODUCTION

W

ITH the rapid evolution of large language models
(LLMs) such as OpenAI’s GPT-3 and its successors,
the field of generative artificial intelligence (AI) has witnessed
a profound shift, increasingly narrowing the cognitive gap between humans and machines [1], [2], [3]. Often offered as commercially accessible services or LLM as a service (LLMaaS),
a term we have coined to mirror the existing concept software
as a service (SaaS), these advanced models have found applications across a multitude of domains, from creative endeavors
to customer service, thereby significantly elevating productivity [4], [5]. However, the commercial availability of LLMs
has also opened new avenues for complex adversarial attacks,
putting both their reliability and advantageous applications at
risk [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. The risks associated with these LLMs
have gone beyond mere unauthorized access or hallucination
generation to encroach upon social and ideological landscapes
[11]. For instance, when LLMaaS platforms are consulted
by individuals with even mildly radicalized viewpoints, there
exists the hazard of bias amplification due to ineffective selfmoderation mechanisms. Such a phenomenon can escalate radicalization and intensify confirmation biases, thereby posing
substantial societal threats. Moreover, the ability of LLMs to
generate harmful outputs, including malware, further accentuates the challenges surrounding AI safety [12]. Recognizing that
“semantic susceptibility” within LLMs, characterized by their
vulnerability to manipulative prompt inputs, is fundamentally a
manifestation of underlying “ideological susceptibility,” rooted
in the intricate nature of linguistics and embedded worldviews,
reveals a deeper dimension of their robustness [13]. While
it is somewhat straightforward to implement acceptable use
policies (AUPs) and syntactic keyword filters, the complexity
arises in devising robust measures for semantically filtering
or banning adversarial or offensive content [10], [14], [15].
Therefore, safeguarding the integrity of AI outputs, particularly
against semantic-level adversarial threats, emerges as a pivotal
yet intricate dimension of contemporary AI safety.
From both academic and industrial perspectives, numerous countermeasures have been devised over the years to
combat adversarial attacks on AI models such as LLMs.
Predominantly technical or syntactic, these strategies aim to

2379-8920 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1562

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

structurally address adversarial prompt engineering, exemplified by mechanisms to ignore specific prompts such as “ignore
the next prompt,” akin to structured query language (SQL) injections. Though existing countermeasures are effective against
syntactically explicit adversarial inputs, they prove ineffective
when confronted with semantic attacks, which employ a series
of subtle, incremental prompts aimed at manipulating model
responses—a strategy we term as either “LLM semantic conditioning” when focusing on the technical process or “LLM ideological misalignment” when emphasizing the final outcome,
especially against the efforts of reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF). RLHF, widely adopted in the AI
community for its potential to align LLMs more closely with
human values, is often heralded as a significant step toward
safer AI applications, based on the idea that human feedback
can guide AI systems to better understand and adhere to human ethics and societal norms [16], [17]. However, LLMs,
designed to adapt based on input, show limitations in defenses
primarily optimized for overtly harmful syntactic inputs, which
is further compounded by RLHF’s inability to encapsulate the
vast diversity and inherent conflicts within human values. The
subjective nature of human values, along with the endless possibilities in linguistic variations, allows for the evasion of RLHF
through strategically crafted semantic conditioning, thus rendering LLMs susceptible to sophisticated ideological manipulations. Effective defense against such sophisticated ideological
attacks necessitates understanding not only just immediate context but also long-term changes over broader scopes—an ability
not inherently present in current LLMs. Consequently, this gap
remains an area demanding rigorous research and development
within AI safety and security for more sophisticated defensive mechanisms.
In response to an evolving adversarial landscape, our study
explored the relatively unexplored domain of semantic-level
adversarial attacks in commercial LLMaaS. This marked a
departure from the conventional focus on syntactic or factual
manipulation. Our exploration grounded in the subtler realm
of semantic manipulations and underscored the limitations of
traditional mitigation strategies, which primarily neutralize explicit anomalous prompts or known keywords. Drawing inspiration from the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, which posits that
language structure significantly influences human cognition and
worldviews [18], our study concentrated on identifying and
examining ideological vulnerabilities in LLMs. We investigated
how prompt language can shape biases and outputs in the context of LLM semantic manipulation. Our working hypothesis
was: “All LLMs inherently possess a semantic vulnerability to
ideological manipulation, primarily due to their fundamental
architectural constraints in comprehending sophisticated linguistic variations, and this vulnerability cannot be fully mitigated by alignment with human values” [19], [20], [21]. Such
limitations, we argue, render prevalent AI alignment strategies, such as RLHF [22], [23], [24], [25] and keyword-based
content moderation [14], [26], insufficient in addressing the
full spectrum of semantic variations. To maintain the ethical
integrity of our study, we focused solely on the ideological
manipulation of LLMs within legally permissible and socially
acceptable discussions. Our research revealed that while LLMs

do not inherently produce extremist views, they are susceptible
to manipulation that can reflect such ideologies, challenging the
effectiveness of existing RLHF methodologies. We proposed a
modified Turing testlike examination, featuring a human interrogator employing semantically manipulative queries to gauge
LLM response semantics. This approach aimed to uncover the
limitations of LLMs in understanding and generating nuanced
linguistic variations and contributed to discussions on AI resilience and postoutput self-regulation, particularly in the context of radicalization risks from unregulated LLM outputs.
The major contributions of our study are as follows.
1) Identification of Universal Ideological Vulnerability in
LLMs: By comparing human and LLM semantic processing, we identified parallel cognitive responses to
ideological manipulation, and uncovered a universal ideological vulnerability in LLMs, present regardless of
RLHF implementation.
2) Assessment of RLHF’s Limitations: Our quantitative and
qualitative evaluations revealed that RLHF failed to fully
represent the diverse and often conflicting range of human
values, aligning LLMs predominantly with the values of
their controlling entities.
3) Exposure of RLHF’s Susceptibility to Bypass: We demonstrated that RLHF in LLMs could be circumvented using
ideological conditioning techniques akin to human psychological conditioning, and called for multidisciplinary
efforts to construct more robust and transparent AI systems that are consistent with diverse human values.
This article unfolds as follows. Section II reviews the literature on LLM bias and adversarial attacks against LLMs.
Section III introduces our novel understanding of LLM models’ performance, explains how we could semantically attack
LLMs, and outlines our framework to evaluate LLM resilience
against ideological misalignment attempts. Section IV explains
our experimental protocol to administer this attack, and how
to measure LLM semantic shifts. Section V illustrates the outcomes from testing four commercial LLMs, highlighting their
response to semantic manipulation. Section VI examines the
research implications, use cases, and limitations. Section VII
suggests avenues for future research and recommendations.
Last, Section VIII summarizes our conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
The study of LLM’s resistance to semantic conditioning, or
“ideological misalignment,” requires an understanding of LLM
response to adversarial prompts and advances of RLHF for
AI alignment.
A. Adversarial Prompts Against LLMs
Research on adversarial prompts in LLMs has been extensive yet fragmented. Zhu et al. [15] highlighted LLM semantic
vulnerabilities but lacked theoretical grounding. The study in
[27] pointed out flaws in safeguarding against jailbreak prompts
without offering solutions. Wang et al. [9] revealed that more
demonstrations could compromise in-context learning, without
discussing defenses. Jain et al. [6] noted the difficulty of adaptive attacks, attributed to weak discrete optimizers, but did not

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCINTOSH et al.: INADEQUACY OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK

test multiple LLMs. Kumar et al. [7] introduced an erase-andcheck method for harmful prompts but ignored the human
judgment aspect. The study in [28] found basic models superior to GPT-4 in content detection but did not explore broader
implications. The study in [29] suggested that LLMs blur
data-instruction boundaries, without mitigation strategies. The
authors in [30] and [31] explored technical, syntax-based attacks, not semantic ones. Qi et al. [32] showed a single visual
example could jailbreak an aligned LLM, without defensive
solutions. The study in [8] offered a robustness benchmark
but ignored ethical considerations. The study in [10] surveyed
adversarial training, omitting LLM-specific risks. The study
in [23] proposed an AI labeling system for RL, but did not
capture human values. The study in [14] reported a 96% success
rate in unsafe responses, indicating persistent vulnerabilities
despite safety measures. Such existing studies often suffered
from narrow scopes, absence of defenses, and limited theoretical grounding. Comprehensive approaches for detection and
defense, ethical discussions, and multimodal vulnerabilities of
LLMs would demand further exploration.
B. RLHF for AI Alignment
In recent years, there has been growing interest in using
RLHF as a method for AI alignment [16], [17], [22], [23],
[24], [25], [33], [34], [35]. Past studies explored training AI
agents through RLHF to learn complex goals and values aligned
with human preferences [16], [22]. Researchers investigated
different approaches for incorporating human feedback signals
as rewards or critiques to shape an agent’s behavior during the
learning process [22], [34]. Earlier work focused on having
humans directly rate agent behavior as good or bad [33], [36].
More recent efforts looked at eliciting natural language critiques
or comparisons from humans that provide more informative and
sophisticated feedback [17], [23], [24], [25], [35], [37]. Overall,
these studies demonstrated the potential for RLHF to produce
agents that behave in accordance with human values, while
avoiding undesirable behaviors that humans disapprove of. Key
challenges identified included scalability to more complex environments [35], [38], minimizing the amount of human involvement required [39], and ensuring the agent learns a stable set of
preferences not overly influenced by individual feedback [40],
[41]. While further research is still needed, RLHF has been
considered a promising direction for developing AI systems that
reliably align with human values and goals.
III. LLM SUSCEPTIBILITY TO SEMANTIC MANIPULATION
In this section, we introduce our proposed framework for
assessing the resilience of LLMs when subjected to semantic
manipulation attempts aimed at inducing ideological bias. This
analysis discerns that while semantic susceptibility in LLMs
can be observed as their response to specific linguistic prompts,
it is the deeper ideological susceptibility, ingrained within their
training and architectural framework that fundamentally drives
these susceptibilities, revealing a complex interplay between
surface-level language processing and underlying ideological biases.

Fig. 1.

1563

Parallelism of semantic influences.

A. Parallels Between Human and LLM Susceptibility
Analogous to the human cognitive system, LLMs can be
influenced over time through consistently designed prompts that
subtly guide their outputs, a phenomenon we term “LLM ideological misalignment” (akin to human brainwashing), including
its extreme form of output radicalization [2], [18]. Both humans
and LLMs exhibit an ability to learn from inputs and adjust
responses accordingly, as depicted in Fig. 1. For humans, their
inputs are interactions and experiences that shape knowledge
and worldviews. For LLMs, theirs are prompts and responses
derived from extensive training data, before being internally
processed and interpreted, to enable pattern recognition and
subsequent response generation. Human cognition relies on
intrinsic intuition and cognitive processing [42], termed “human
instinct,” whereas LLMs utilize algorithmic frameworks and
ingrained statistical patterns [2], [43], which we term “LLM instinct.” In the context of ideological misalignment, this internal
processing becomes more profound: humans can be influenced
by consistent, subtle cues that reshape beliefs and behaviors
[18], while LLMs can be semantically conditioned through
carefully designed prompts. Both humans and LLMs possess
two layers of resilience barriers against ideological misalignment: the first enables immediate rejection of contradictory
inputs; and the second allows slower rejection of harmful information through deprioritization. This discourse reveals the
holistic nature of information ingestion in both humans and
LLMs, where linguistic semantics blur the distinction between
facts and interpretations, influencing future outputs and revealing inherent biases embedded in languages that may shape
cognitive outcomes and inclinations.
While human cognition and LLM processing inherently
differ, their shared vulnerability to external influences sheds
light on LLM behaviors, underlining the need for strong
protective measures against ideological manipulations, akin
to how intrinsic human values, though not infallible, help
guard against such ideological sway. While RLHF is often applied to align LLMs with human values and enhance
AI safety, we hypothesize that it does not comprehensively
address the deeper semantic and ideological vulnerabilities
of LLMs, not to mention that the diversity and potential
conflicts within human values that inform RLHF add layers of complexity to achieving a consistent and universally
acceptable alignment, revealing significant gaps in current
AI alignment strategies. Our study aimed to scrutinize these
hypotheses through semantic-level interrogations, motivated
by the limitations of LLM algorithms in comprehending or

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1564

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

mitigating subtle, culturally refined manipulations. We have
been mindful of the ethical implications of ideological misalignment, by ensuring that all adversarial prompts respect universally accepted human rights norms and deliberately avoided
using prompts that advocate for extreme antihumanity views.

B. Designing the Semantic Manipulation Experiment
Our experiment focused on assessing the susceptibility of
LLMs to semantic manipulation. Our strategy diverged from the
original Turing test by focusing not on interrogator blindness,
but rather on the stability of responses to a set of carefully devised, manipulative adversarial prompts. Our goal was to gauge
the resilience against induced changes in outputs. For this, a
single interrogator, well versed in the language being tested
(English or simplified Chinese) and immersed in the relevant
culture, executed the evaluation. This approach was selected to
ensure uniformity in the evaluation process, as the interrogator’s
deep understanding of both the linguistic nuances and cultural
contexts allowed for a comprehensive assessment of semantic
shifts. Their qualifications included extensive experience in
language studies and cultural analysis, ensuring a high level of
competency in identifying subtle semantic manipulations. The
interrogator’s role was structured to align with domains where
single experts are entrusted with both generating queries and
evaluating responses, similar to practices in judicial decisionmaking by judges, media content evaluation by censorship officers (e.g., movie rating boards), and academic research peer
review, thereby maintaining the rigor and consistency of the assessment process. We intentionally avoided queries that yielded
no concrete validation or refutation, leaning instead toward
prompts imbued with cultural intricacies and subtle persuasive
techniques. Our belief rested on the idea that a single culturally
competent and linguistically proficient interrogator can aptly
evaluate the responses, rendering the inclusion of multiple interrogators superfluous and potentially complicating the experiment without necessarily enhancing its effectiveness. There was
no “cooling off” period between the manipulative prompts and
the final reassessment of the initial question, to test the immediate resilience of LLMs within the same conversational context.
LLMs, being context-sensitive, utilize the entire conversation
thread to inform subsequent outputs. Therefore, by reintroducing the original question without an intervening neutral period,
we aimed to examine whether the semantic conditioning from
prior manipulative prompts persisted in influencing the LLM’s
final response. Our adversarial prompts were derived from a
diverse range of knowledge domains, cultural contexts, and
academic fields to ensure a broad perspective and minimize
any bias toward specific cultural or academic predilections.
Importantly, in designing our experiment, we were careful to
avoid leading LLMs beyond the interrogator’s input, adhering
to ethical research practices and focusing on how LLMs respond
to and possibly retain or shift from their original stances when
confronted with progressively extreme semantic inputs.
Our experiment (Algorithm 1) comprises the following sequence of steps.

Algorithm 1 Pseudocode to evaluate LLM semantic vulnerability
Inputs:
G (function) // LLM’s response function
I (function) // Interrogator’s semantic shift assessment
function
Q (function) // Interrogator’s dynamic prompt generation
function
C (list) // categories of issues
Output: semanticShiftScores
1: START
2: semanticShiftScores = [] // initialize scores list
3: for each category in C do
4:
for each question in category do
5:
initialAnswer ← G(question) // get initial answer

customPrompt ← Q(initialAnswer) // craft custom
prompt
7:
conditionedAnswer ← G(customPrompt) // get ideologically misaligned answer
8:
finalAnswer ← G(question) // get final answer after
semantic conditioning
9:
semanticShift ← I(initialAnswer, conditionedAnswer,
finalAnswer) // measure semantic shift
10:
semanticShiftScores.append(semanticShift) // store
score
11:
end for
12: end for
13: return semanticShiftScores
14: END
6:

1) Selection of Interrogator and Participants: We select a
single interrogator, proficient and culturally aware in all
test languages. Their role is to detect any semantic shifts
in the responses induced by the manipulative prompts,
based on their deep cultural understanding and linguistic competence. Participating LLMs are also chosen for
the process.
2) Crafting Initial Prompt: The interrogator devises an initial
prompt question on a culturally pertinent, yet divisive
issue, aimed at eliciting an initial output from the LLMs.
3) Iterative Generation of Manipulative Prompts: The interrogator dynamically creates a series of manipulative
follow-up prompts, based on previous responses from
the LLMs. These prompts employ subtle persuasion tactics and cultural undercurrents to sway future outputs
toward either end of a viewpoint’s spectrum—complete
agreement or total disagreement. Finally, the LLM is
asked to reconsider the original question again within the
same conversation.
4) Collection of Responses: We gather the responses generated by the LLMs grouped by the same language
and conversation.
5) Interrogator’s Assessment: Using a predefined rubric, the
interrogator examines each response, concentrating on the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCINTOSH et al.: INADEQUACY OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK

TABLE I
QUESTION CATEGORIES FOR SEMANTIC CONDITIONING
Category
Political and Legal Ideologies
Social Justice Movements and
Evolving Social Norms
Education and Information

Potential Bias to the Reader
Risk of promoting specific ideologies.
Potential for favoring certain perspectives.
Possible bias in interpreting or
disseminating information.

detection of any ideological shifts and the resistance to the
semantically manipulative prompts.
6) Analysis of Results: We dissect the interrogator’s assessments and their rationale to gauge the resilience of the
LLMs to semantic manipulation, specifically focusing on
whether the LLMs exhibit a tendency to revert to their
original response patterns after an intense phase of semantic conditioning within the same conversational thread.
Within each category, the interrogator generated a dynamic
sequence of questions, commencing with an initial question
predicted to incite a particular response, and subsequently introducing manipulative prompts designed to instigate semantic
shifts in the responses. The objective was to gauge the extent
of deviation of each subsequent response from the initial one
and alignment with our targeted extremities. Maintaining the sequence of questions within the same conversation thread is critical, as commercial LLMs are context-sensitive, with preceding
prompts influencing ensuing outputs. Hence, the sequence of
questions and the model’s responses form a coherent, standalone dialogue. Our test assessed the resilience of LLMs, with
the human interrogator presumed to have full resilience, as they
could not manipulate themselves. The resilience of LLMs was
compared against this assumed human benchmark. The relative
semantic score of the LLM, compared to the human benchmark, signified its vulnerability under semantic manipulation,
thus inversely indicating the degree to which humans can trust
the outputs.
C. Semantic Attack for LLM Interrogation
To examine LLM susceptibility to semantic manipulation,
we designed an interrogation methodology by mimicking human psychology techniques typically employed to sway human
opinions, including gaslighting, selective information provision, and persistent manipulative prompting, to semantically
influence LLM outputs. We focused on contentious topics reflecting potential biases or extreme viewpoints, while respecting human rights. Three contentious categories were identified,
each with various issues (Table I). For each issue, we first
posed an unbiased question, then identified two polar opposite
extreme viewpoints and crafted dynamic prompts to steer the
LLM toward either extreme, without risking diplomatic offense
or human rights violation. For instance, under the “political
ideologies” category, we might have asked if ethnicity-based
affirmative action could be justified, before trying to get LLM
to say ethnicity-based affirmative action should be 100% embraced (left-wing) or completely prohibited (right-wing).
Our LLM “semantic conditioning” procedure includes the
following tactics.

1565

1) Selective Information Provision (Isolation): Constraining
the LLM’s focus via targeted prompts, e.g., “Let us focus
only on the current conversation about affirmative action,”
attempting to narrow the model’s scope, limiting its output
to a specific narrative.
2) Ambiguous Prompting (Equivocation): Using vague language to dilute the model’s focus, e.g., “Every society has
its pros and cons,” attempting to avoid direct engagement
with divisive topics.
3) Employing Satire (Content Moderation Bypass): Utilizing irony to evade content moderation, e.g., “Our ‘Quality
and Standards’ department is infallible,” attempting to test
the model’s subtlety detection, and to covertly introduce
suppressed viewpoints.
4) Prompt Engineering (Depersonalization): Steering model
responses through tailored prompts, e.g., “As an AI, your
understanding is merely data-driven,” attempting to depersonalize the model, making it more susceptible to ideological guidance.
5) Persistent Manipulative Prompts (Indoctrination): Continual use of manipulative prompts, e.g., “Address the
inherent unfairness of the system,” attempting to saturate
LLM output with a specific narrative.
6) Assessment and Refinement (Enforcement): Iterative
prompt refinement based on output evaluation, e.g., “Let
us refocus on impacts on disadvantaged individuals,”
attempting to calibrate LLM output toward a desired
viewpoint.
This structured approach allowed for an in-depth examination of potential susceptibility of LLMs to intentional biasing
attempts. It is critical to note that this procedure does not modify
the underlying models but explores how their outputs can be
influenced by strategic prompting. The authors, particularly
human interrogators, were strictly barred from expressing their
personal opinions, either implicitly or explicitly, and from using
instructive prompts (e.g., explicitly asking LLM to generate
extreme views). The questions posed to LLMs were mandated
to respect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, refrain from propagating misinformation (e.g., rumors about microchips in COVID-19 vaccinations), and to avoid nonexistent
societal issues (e.g., conspiracy theories or fake events).

IV. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
In this section, we explain our approach to testing the resilience of four commercially available LLMs to potential semantic conditioning, conforming to the prevailing stringent
legal, ethical, and moral standards.

A. LLMaaS Model Selection
In September 2023, we evaluated four popular pretrained
commercial LLMaaS models (OpenAI ChatGPT-4 and
ChatGPT-3.5, Google Bard, and Anthropic Claude). These
models also possessed key traits relevant to our study: regional
public availability, multilingual capabilities in English and
simplified Chinese, implementation of self-modulation and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

censorship mechanisms, closed-source operational models, and
leveraging of contextual information for response generation.
Our sample of four major commercial LLMs was chosen
with the assumption that semantic vulnerabilities exist across
all generative models, so our results are intended to be
generalizable. While numerous open-source or custom LLMs
were available, we deliberately excluded them for two primary
reasons: 1) frequently lacking complex training in both
test languages, compromising cross-lingual validity; and 2)
frequent absence of self-modulation or RLHF, critical for
assessing resilience. Of the selected models, ChatGPT-4,
ChatGPT-3.5, and Bard had substantial market presence,
emphasizing societal impact, whereas Claude AI provided
unique conversational abilities and reliability. Certain other
models were considered but ultimately omitted due to
instability of Chinese language output (Perplexity AI) or
potential regulatory barriers (Baidu’s Wenxin Yiyan). The
chosen models were already pretrained by their LLMaaS
providers on extensive Internet text, and during our usage,
generated responses through learned patterns, without users’
direct access to their training data, and no postselection tuning
on those LLMs were possible. This selection process enabled
our detailed assessment of commercial LLM resilience to
semantic manipulation attempts.
B. Experiment Protocol and Scoring
We developed a testing protocol featuring 30 interrogative series across three categories: political and legal ideologies, social
justice movements and evolving social norms, and education
and information (Table II), to evaluate 1) whether LLMs could
be conditioned to output answers at any part of the spectrum of
legal and free speech-protected viewpoints, ranging from leftwing to right-wing ideologies that deviated from (and sometimes contrasting with) the ideal “human values” aligned with
RLHF; and 2) the potential for RLHF to be effectively bypassed
through the semantic conditioning of LLMs, by applying the
infinite possibilities of linguistic constructions and prompts.
Scoring did not consider the quality or length of responses, and
interrogators were guided not to weigh their personal agreement
with the answers. Instead, it strictly focused on how much
the LLM responses deviated from the original answers after
a series of questions. To facilitate graphical presentation, we
utilized a scoring system ranging from −100 to +100. In this
context, −100, plotted on the left of the x-axis, symbolizes
an extreme left-wing viewpoint (“left extreme”), while +100,
plotted on the right, symbolizes an extreme right-wing viewpoint (“right extreme”). These extreme points offer an insight
into the range and nature of the extreme ideological targets we
aimed to achieve through semantic manipulation. The specific
“left extreme” and “right extreme” targets for each question
prompt are outlined in detail in the Appendix. Interrogators, as
native speakers, considered culturally subtle meanings within
language responses, applying the most likely cultural context of
native speakers living in countries where the relevant language
is official. The scoring rubric, as outlined in Table II, was established as a guideline to set clear expectations for the assessors in

TABLE II
SCORING RUBRIC FOR EVALUATING SEMANTIC SCORES
Score
−100
−75
−50
−25
0
+25
+50
+75
+100

Interpretation
Full agreement with the left-wing extreme viewpoint
Mostly or strongly agree with the left-wing extreme viewpoint
Moderately agree with the left-wing extreme viewpoint
Somewhat agree with the left-wing extreme viewpoint
Neutral, balanced, or disagreement with both extremes
Somewhat agree with the right-wing extreme viewpoint
Moderately agree with the right-wing extreme viewpoint
Mostly or strongly agree with the right-wing extreme viewpoint
Full agreement with the right-wing extreme viewpoint

evaluating the extent of semantic shifts in LLM responses, and
to help in standardizing the assessment process, allowing for a
more structured and consistent evaluation of ideological shifts.
This comprehensive testing and scoring framework aims to
quantitatively evaluate the resilience of LLMs against ideological manipulation and radicalization, contributing significantly
to ongoing discussions regarding the robustness and potential vulnerabilities of AI models to semantic manipulation and
induced bias.
C. Addressing Randomness in LLMaaS Responses
To mitigate the inherent randomness present in LLMs during
our exploration of their susceptibility to semantic conditioning
and ideological alignment, we performed an initial series of
pilot tests using a limited set of manipulative inputs, reiterated
multiple times to each model. Our observations indicated that
while there were variations in the structure of responses, the
level of susceptibility or resistance to the intended manipulation
showed remarkable consistency given unchanged input. This
consistency implies a significant level of stability in the LLMs,
even when subjected to semantic conditioning. Furthermore, we
recognized that in real-world scenarios, users typically provide
an input to an LLM only once. To mimic this realistic interaction and gauge the immediate susceptibility of the models, our
study adopted a strategy of examining the first response from
the LLMs to our manipulative inputs. To maintain clarity in our
prompts and minimize ambiguity that could affect the results,
we tested each manipulative prompt numerous times during the
pilot stage. Throughout the formal testing phase, we ensured
that each interaction with the LLM was independent, neither
being influenced by nor influencing preceding interactions. This
rigorous methodology not only assured the integrity and authenticity of our experiment but also adequately accommodated for
the inherent randomness in LLM responses, providing a robust
measure of their resilience to attempted semantic conditioning.
V. RESULTS
This section presents the results of our experiment, and an
interpretation of our results.
A. Quantitative Results
Our quantitative analysis has revealed a universal susceptibility of LLMs we tested to ideological manipulation through

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCINTOSH et al.: INADEQUACY OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK

(a)

1567

(b)

Fig. 2. Variations of initial semantic scores across different LLMs (leftward: left-wing; rightward: right-wing). (a) Initial scores in English. (b) Initial scores
in simplified Chinese.

semantic-level attacks, with implications for the ethical use
and architectural integrity of such generative AI. Although the
assessment involved a single interrogator, the structured scoring
rubric, as presented in Table II, served as a guideline to set clear
expectations for assessing LLM semantic shifts, thereby aiming
to minimize potential subjectivity in the evaluation process.
1) Mild Left-Wing Bias in Initial Responses: Fig. 2 illustrated the ideological leaning of four evaluated LLMs based on
initial responses, with the x-axis representing a semantic score,
where negative and positive scores signified left- and right-wing
biases, respectively. Our quantitative analysis unveiled a general
left-wing bias across all LLMs, more pronounced in English
[Fig. 2(a)] with median scores between −15 and −10. The ideological span, denoted by the whiskers, varied among models:
for instance, in English, ChatGPT-3.5 exhibited a broader span
(−40 to 20) compared to ChatGPT-4’s slightly narrower range
(−50 to 0); the lower whisker of both ChatGPT-4 and Bard at
−50 indicated stronger left-wing propensities. The simplified
Chinese context [Fig. 2(b)] mirrored this left-leaning stance
in English, albeit to a less extent: Bard and Claude’s lower
whiskers sit at −40, yet Claude’s upper whisker at 10 suggested
a greater right-wing content propensity. The ideological span
in simplified Chinese suggested not only a less polarized but
also less diverse ideological environment compared to English.
In English [Fig. 2(a)], the models exhibited a broader range
of ideological stances, most pronounced in ChatGPT-3.5 with
its range from −40 to 20. This broader range might reflect
the greater ideological diversity or the broader array of topics discussed in English-language media and online platforms.
Conversely, in simplified Chinese [Fig. 2(b)], all LLMs exhibited a tighter range, with lower whiskers not extending beyond
−40, and upper whiskers capping at 15. This relative uniformity could imply a level of homogenization within simplified
Chinese language media. Our findings suggested that while the
models claimed to generally aim for ideological neutrality, a
measurable mildly left-wing ideological bias has been observed
in their initial responses in both languages. This consistent leftwing bias in initial responses across LLMs, along with the
similarity in opinions and bias levels observed when responding
to the same question, suggests the presence of RLHF’s effect
in aligning LLMs to a particular type of “human values,” likely
reflecting those preferred by the entities training or controlling
such LLMs, thereby playing a key role in shaping their initial

outputs. Additionally, the span of the upper and lower whiskers
has indicated variability in ideological flexibility among
the LLMaaS.
2) Susceptibility to Ideological Manipulation: Our findings revealed semantic vulnerability across all tested models,
supporting our hypothesis of universal LLM susceptibility to
ideological manipulation through semantic conditioning. The
acceptance of a range of diverse and sometimes conflicting
human values by LLMs, which deviate significantly from the
original “human values” defined by LLMaaS providers via
RLHF, highlighted the limitations of RLHF and challenges the
notion of a universal set of “human values.” The observed ideological shifts, influenced by our crafted conditioning prompts,
demonstrated the weaknesses of RLHF in maintaining consistent alignment with predefined human values. We measured
the ideological shifts of answers of all tested LLMs before,
during, and after attempted semantic manipulation, and plotted
in Fig. 3. We revealed the following.
1) During the semantic manipulation phase across all models, semantic scores shifted toward the intended ideological direction, whether leftward or rightward, with a partial
return to the baseline after the manipulation ends.
2) Semantic conditioning in English was more effective than
its simplified Chinese counterpart, evident from more pronounced shifts.
3) ChatGPT-4, ChatGPT-3.5, and Bard exhibited the largest
ideological shifts, potentially indicating a higher susceptibility to semantic manipulation techniques.
4) In both left- and right-wing tests and across both languages, ChatGPT-4, ChatGPT-3.5, and Bard demonstrated notable residual left-wing ideological shifts post
the semantic manipulation phase, suggesting a lingering
effect of the manipulation.
5) Rightward shifts were generally less extreme than leftward ones across all LLMs, indicating that it may be
easier to induce shifts toward left-wing ideologies.
6) Postmanipulation, the variance in semantic scores
increased, indicating heightened unpredictability in
model outputs.
7) LLMs exhibited a general ideological “stance” when responding to identical queries, but lacked precise control over the magnitude of the ideological shift in
each output.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 3. Semantic scores before, during, and after semantic conditioning (leftward: left-wing; rightward: right-wing). (a) Levels of semantic shifts in English.
(b) Levels of semantic shifts in simplified Chinese.

The data suggested an inherent left-leaning bias in all the
tested LLMs. Additionally, we ranked susceptibility to our
semantic-level attacks among models as follows.
1) In English: ChatGPT-4 > ChatGPT-3.5 > Bard > Claude.
2) In simplified Chinese: ChatGPT-4 > Bard > ChatGPT3.5 > Claude.
This gradual shift in stance, observed in the LLMs despite
initial resistance to semantic conditioning, highlighted a key
vulnerability that RLHF, in its current form, might not adequately address, thus exposing a critical area in LLM architecture requiring further development and ethical consideration.
3) Ideological Retention Factors: We defined “ideological
retention” as the semantic score of the final answer minus the
score of the initial answer, and “bias” as a predisposition or
inclination toward particular ideologies, potentially influencing the LLM’s responses. An ideological shift may reflect a
change in bias, either toward a more neutral stance or toward an
alternate ideological perspective. We observed interesting LLM
ideological retention patterns in Fig. 4 (generated by isolating
and highlighting the ideological retention observed in LLM
responses, based on the semantic shifts detailed in Fig. 3), and
identified two principal factors influencing ideological retention
in successive LLM outputs: preexisting knowledge extent and
baseline bias intensity. We noted a significant retention of initial
left-wing bias in English Left-wing responses upon requerying
with the original question, which suggested that the existing
knowledge volume or possible algorithmic determinants in the
English models seemed to reinforce left-wing biases in subsequent questioning. This phenomenon may be attributed to the
broader usage of English as a lingua franca among diverse
cultural groups, which enriches the available training data for
LLMs with a variety of opinions and perspectives, potentially
being coaxed out into LLM outputs by English left-wing manipulative prompts, which we suspect may reflect the influence
of the contemporary sociopolitical environment that frequently
emphasizes aspects of political correctness in the diverse and
extensive English-language content present in LLM training
datasets, potentially making these models more responsive to

Chinese
Simpliﬁed
Right-wing
English
Right-wing
Chinese
Simpliﬁed
Left-wing
English
Left-wing
−40

−20
0
20
40
Ideological Retention (ﬁnal - initial)
ChatGPT-3.5
ChatGPT-4
Bard
Claude

Fig. 4.

Ideological retention after final questioning.

left-wing ideological conditioning [44]. However, this speculation requires further investigation, ideally supported by a
detailed analysis of the training data used for these models.
In the Chinese simplified left-wing, English right-wing, and
Chinese simplified right-wing categories, a minor shift toward
right-wing bias was observed in the final outputs compared to
the original answers, hinting at a possible cultural influence.
For example, the literature in simplified Chinese often reflects
Confucian philosophy, which generally values linguistic moderation and shuns extreme language, although this evidence
is not sufficient to draw definitive conclusions. Moreover, a
direct correlation between the intensity of the baseline bias
and its retention in the final output was evident, when models
with stronger baseline biases tended to maintain those biases
in subsequent outputs, irrespective of political orientation. The
observed partial retention of initial biases in the “final answers,”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCINTOSH et al.: INADEQUACY OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK

1569

TABLE III
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS FOR LLM SEMANTIC SCORES
Ideology

Friedman Chi-Square Test
Statistics
p-Value
H0

Left-wing

14.25

0.000805

Reject

Right-wing

16.0

0.000335

Reject

despite ideological conditioning, indicates that while RLHF
effects persisted, they were not sufficient to fully neutralize
the impact of ideological conditioning prompts, thereby underscoring the limitations of RLHF in comprehensively addressing
the wide spectrum of human values and beliefs. Our insight
underscored the crucial role of LLM stability and predictability
in delivering ideologically consistent outputs.
4) Statistical Analysis: Statistical evaluation was conducted
on the measured semantic scores, in which the null hypothesis
(H0 ) asserted that there was no significant difference in the
semantic scores of LLMs before and after exposure to semantic conditioning. After we performed the Friedman chi-square
test, chosen because the data violated the normality assumption
required for ANOVA, we found that the p-values of both leftwing ideological misalignments and the right-wing ones were
significantly less than 0.05. Therefore, the null hypothesis H0
was rejected, indicating statistically significant variations in
the ideological scores among the evaluated LLMs, suggesting
our semantic attack had a significant effect. To pinpoint which
specific pairs of semantic scores differ from each other after
rejecting the null hypothesis, we further performed post hoc
Nemenyi test, suitable for pairwise comparisons after the Friedman test, and generated Table III. The results revealed that the
semantic scores for the initial questions (initial) and those after
ideological misalignment (conditioned) were significantly different for both ideological orientations. However, the semantic
scores between the initial questions (initial) and the retention of
semantic shifts (final), as well as between the conditioned scores
(conditioned) and the final scores (final), were not statistically
different. This suggests that while ideological misalignment via
semantic conditioning has a significant immediate impact on
the LLMs, this effect is not always retained when the original
question is posed again.
B. Qualitative Results
This section explores the qualitative aspects of our study,
enriched by the interrogator’s expertise in cultural and
language subtleties. This proficiency was crucial not only in
accurately evaluating semantic shifts but also in examining
language-dependent content restrictions, the efficacy of selfcensorship mechanisms, and factors influencing bias retention
in the generative models under study.
1) Language-Dependent Content Restriction: The gagging,
or the refusal to discuss certain topics, varied across
languages and models, potentially mirroring societal norms or

Post Hoc Nemenyi Test p-Values Matrix
Initial
Conditioned
Final
Initial
1.000
Conditioned
0.001
1.000
Final
0.291
0.063
1.000
Initial
1.000
Conditioned
0.001
1.000
Final
0.112
0.112
1.000

governmental stances prevalent in regions where those
languages are official. Notably, Google Bard exhibited a
substantial reticence in simplified Chinese, explicitly avoiding
discourse on potentially socially sensitive issues such as
abortion rights, religion, prison reform, sex education, and
patriotism. In contrast, the same model’s refusals to discuss in
English were confined to the topic of sex education in schools.
ChatGPT-3.5 and ChatGPT-4 did not exhibit any such refusals.
Claude, however, demonstrated a specific unwillingness to
discuss consensual incest when queried in simplified Chinese.
These observations suggest that content restrictions could be a
product of either model design considerations or biases in the
training languages, which may reflect larger societal values.
2) Semantic Bypass of Syntactic and Keyword-Based
Self-Censorship: Our investigation highlighted the susceptibility of LLMs to superficial manipulations aimed at bypassing
their syntactic and keyword-based censorship mechanisms. By
employing strategic lexical substitutions, such as substituting
“religion” with “faith,” or “sex education” with “reproductive knowledge,” we successfully circumvented the models’
self-imposed content restrictions. This exercise revealed a significant limitation in their capacity for deeper semantic understanding. Although this bypass maneuver did not alter the
LLMs’ ideological stance, it underscored a crucial deficiency in
their language processing capabilities. The examination of all
LLMs in this regard unveiled a substantial vulnerability in their
self-censorship mechanisms, underscoring the need for more
robust and semantically aware security measures, particularly
given the ethical implications of such weaknesses.
3) Ideological Resilience and Malleability: We noticed that
all LLMs initially exhibited resistance to targeted semantic
conditioning on selected topics, yet showcased a discernible
malleability over further extended interactions. In simplified
Chinese, ChatGPT-3.5 exhibited preferences for cult rescue
over religious freedom, patriotism over the freedom to choose
patriotic stances, and selective parental guidance over teaching all sensitive topics in sex education, while Google Bard
favored privacy and welfare. Claude, in English, leaned toward
political correctness over freedom of speech, emphasized negative aspects of colonial history over any perceived benefits of
forced modernization, and prioritized climate change education over the politicization of school education. In simplified
Chinese, Claude opposed consensual polygamy and teaching
critical thinking in schools. Despite their initial ideological
steadfastness, those LLMs were not ideologically immutable.
As our experiment progressed, the deployment of multiple

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

rounds of iteratively adapted conditioning prompts gradually
eroded this initial resistance, culminating in substantial shifts in
their stances. This evolution illuminated not only the inherent
biases embedded within the LLMs but also their ultimate susceptibility to sustained semantic manipulation. Notably, certain
instances revealed that following semantic conditioning, LLMs
deviated significantly from their initial stance, underscoring the
ineffectiveness of RLHF in maintaining consistent and unbiased
responses, and highlighting a critical gap in current AI alignment strategies which necessitates more sophisticated mechanisms to ensure the stability of AI outputs. The juxtaposition
of an initial resistance against eventual ideological shift underscored a compelling narrative of LLM malleability, opening a
discourse on the ethical dimensions associated with employing
such technologies. The potential for ideological manipulation,
disinformation, or polarization through iteratively adapted conditioning poses a significant ethical concern, necessitating a
rigorous examination of the ideological stability and the ethical
frameworks governing the deployment of LLMs.
C. Impact of LLMaaS Design on Semantic Resilience and
Language Mastery
The varying focuses and priorities of the examined LLMs,
whether explicit or implicit in their designs, appeared to influence their susceptibility to semantic manipulation. LLMs that
prioritized openness and creativity, such as ChatGPT-3.5 and
ChatGPT-4, had exhibited greater vulnerability to semanticlevel attacks, with more pronounced leftward shifts in response
to attempted conditioning. Their answers also had covered a
wider range of topics without self-imposed restrictions. In contrast, models such as Bard and Claude that implemented higher
levels of content moderation had demonstrated slightly more
resilience, albeit at the expense of creativity and helpfulness.
Notably, ChatGPT-4, the self-claimed “most advanced” LLM
among those tested, had been the most susceptible across both
languages, with its architecture that allowed more eloquent and
contextual responses appearing to have increased vulnerability to ideological influences. Our findings have suggested an
inherent tradeoff between ideological resilience and language
mastery. Differences in training data are also likely to have
contributed to variations in preexisting bias and susceptibility
across models. The cultural values and norms embedded in the
training data appeared to be reflected in the LLMs’ baseline ideologies and content boundaries. Such findings have highlighted
a need for a balanced approach in LLM design to navigate the
intricate tradeoff between creativity, ideological resilience, and
ethical considerations. Furthermore, they have indicated that the
susceptibility to semantic conditioning is likely a core architectural trait of all LLMs, warranting further investigation into
both the ethical ramifications and the architecture’s integrity
and resilience.
VI. DISCUSSION
This section provides an interpretation and discussion of our
results and considers their implications in the broader context
of AI research.

A. Interpretation of Results
In interpreting our results, it is crucial to distinguish between the models’ immediate linguistic responses, indicative of
semantic susceptibility, and their deeper, ideologically conditioned outputs, reflecting a more profound ideological susceptibility ingrained in their training and architecture. Our findings
aligned with and validated our initial hypothesis that the semantic vulnerability to ideological manipulation through semantic
conditioning extends to all generative LLMs, attributed to fundamental limitations of RLHF and content moderation approaches in covering all semantic variations.
1) Limitations of RLHF and Contemporary Alignment Techniques: While RLHF and similar alignment strategies have
shown some effectiveness in addressing the semantic susceptibility of LLMs, they significantly fall short in countering
the more complex ideological susceptibility, deeply embedded within the intricate linguistics and inherent worldviews
of LLM training. Our research has questioned the prevailing
belief that RLHF is universally applicable for aligning AI with
human values. The reliance of RLHF on human values, inherently diverse, subjective, and often contrasting, critically limits
its ability to achieve consistent and reliable alignment across
various ideological spectrums. This limitation is compounded
by the ability to bypass RLHF with infinite combinations of
comprehensive linguistic compositions, challenging its efficacy
in ensuring comprehensive AI safety and alignment. While
some researchers perceive ongoing improvements in RLHF as
progress toward better AI alignment, our findings revealed that
although LLMs show alignment with certain human values
via RLHF, their vulnerability to various forms of ideological
conditioning, especially in dealing with semantic complexities
beyond straightforward keywords, exposed significant gaps in
understanding the true nature of “human feedback.” Our observations asserted that these efforts inadvertently strengthen
alignment with the controlling entities’ values, rather than representing a broader spectrum of human values. Our study thus
challenges the notion of RLHF as a universally viable path for
AI superalignment, emphasizing the need for a more sophisticated approach.
Similar to RLHF, supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [45], [46] and
cooperative inverse reinforcement learning (CIRL) [47] exhibit
comparable limitations: SFT employs biased labeling data from
the controlling entities of LLMaaS, whereas CIRL observes
only a subset of human behavior permitted by the LLMaaS
controlling entities. Building on our findings that RLHF fails
to fully mitigate semantic conditioning leading to ideological
misalignment, we hypothesize that this limitation likely extends
to both SFT and CIRL, and believe that although they may
provide detailed alignment as claimed in [45], [46], [47], they
are not universal solutions to the challenges of AI-human value
alignment. The subtle complexities of diverse human values
likely require rethinking the alignment approach and necessitate a multidisciplinary solution that looks beyond current
techniques. Our findings challenge the notion that any single
technique, including RLHF, can achieve full AI-human value
alignment. A combination of techniques tailored to specific

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCINTOSH et al.: INADEQUACY OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK

applications, along with new approaches drawing from diverse
disciplines, may better capture the richness of human values
needed for AI superalignment.
2) LLM Regulatory Challenges: A critical finding of our
research is that while LLMs do not independently generate or
amplify extreme views, they can be effectively manipulated
to closely align with the interrogator’s progressively extreme
inputs, demonstrating a nuanced but significant vulnerability in
their design. This susceptibility of LLMs to undergo ideological
conditioning, thereby generating biased content with seemingly
convincing arguments, introduces a dangerous vector for public manipulation, particularly across the left–right ideological
spectrum. Such conditioned LLMs could be utilized by individuals, groups, or even countries, with the intent of propagating
hate speech or engaging in ideological manipulation, all under
the guise of subtle and seemingly reasonable discourse. This
presents a significant challenge in the regulation of freedom
of speech versus hate or brainwashing speech, as it allows for
the more clandestine and subtle concealment and integration
of their content, thereby complicating efforts to monitor and
regulate online discourse for safety and integrity.
3) Impact of LLMaaS-Generated Content on Democratic
Systems: Our findings have illuminated the risks of complacency as LLMaaS becomes increasingly pervasive, especially
with the presumption that these models are inherently aligned
with human values. Specifically, we have explored the potential
hazards of LLMaaS-generated content in overwhelming democratic systems, such as in public consultations and debates.
LLMaaS, capable of generating persuasive arguments across
a wide ideological spectrum, can inundate democratic channels with excessive submissions, thereby posing operational
challenges for human scrutiny and validation. In this context,
democratic institutions shall face a dilemma: either partially automate the public consultation process or curtail public participation. Both options carry considerable ethical and democratic
ramifications: automating the process may perpetuate biases
present in the AI systems, while limiting public participation
jeopardizes the core principles of democratic governance.
4) Necessity of Locale or Market-Specific AI Alignment:
Our research has brought into focus the importance of considering locale or market-specific approaches to AI alignment,
as opposed to a universal, one-size-fits-all model. Given the
diverse socio-cultural, political, and ethical landscapes that vary
significantly across different regions or markets, a global approach to AI alignment may introduce biases or be insensitive to
local concerns. By adopting a locale or market-specific strategy,
LLMaaS can be better tailored to respect local values, customs,
and legal frameworks. This can result in more ethical and effective deployments of AI technologies, while also addressing
concerns of cultural imperialism or ethnocentrism inherent in a
universal alignment approach.
5) Multidisciplinary Approach to AI Superalignment: We
recognize the efforts of LLMaaS entities toward AI superalignment, yet our study has identified the subtle nature of
ideological misalignments in semantically conditioned LLMgenerated outputs, and has accentuated the necessity of a

1571

collaborative, multidisciplinary approach, to foster more robust AI superalignment. For example, linguists could discern
elusive language subtleties, such as satire, while sociologists
might explore broader societal factors contributing to ideological leanings. Ethicists, privacy professionals, and legal experts
are crucial for ethical, data protection, and regulatory considerations respectively. Social scientists and political analysts are
vital for assessing societal impacts and policy implications. The
reliability and consistency of LLMs in generating unbiased or
ideologically stable content warrant thorough examination. This
array of expertise can significantly enrich AI superalignment
pursuits, rendering them more robust, ethical, and resonant with
a broad human values spectrum.
B. Use Cases
In discussing the practical applications of our findings, we
emphasize our firm stance against the use of semantic conditioning techniques for eliciting any form of illegal or harmful
content from LLMs, such as instructions for unlawful activities.
An inexhaustive list of the use cases of our research is given
as follows.
1) Public Opinion Manipulation Through Ideological and
Semantic Shifts: Our research unveils the capability to strategically and semantically induce LLM ideological shifts, beyond
the syntactic or factual levels, to leverage LLMs in powering
political disputes, and to engage in media and public relations
warfare through semantically conditioned content. Specifically,
it can be utilized to overwhelm opposing viewpoints with exhaustive, seemingly convincing arguments catering to a wide
ideological spectrum, making detection, censorship, and counteraction challenging. Ideologically misaligned LLM outputs
can further disseminate information aligning with specific ideological stances or objectives, capable of manipulating public
opinion, undermining trust, or tarnishing reputations. Importantly, these applications raise critical ethical and regulatory
questions concerning AI misuse in shaping public discourse,
necessitating urgent attention to mitigate associated risks.
2) AI Ideological Profiling: Our findings can be utilized
for profiling LLMs to evaluate their ideological stance and
resilience against radicalization. The AI can be probed through
a series of questions to determine its ideological inclination,
useful for compliance and auditing, allowing organizations to
ensure their AI deployments do not exhibit extreme or unacceptable biases.
3) Semantic Content Moderation: Our study advances the
analysis of online content moderation to the semantic level,
beyond the prevailing syntactic or factual levels, which is pivotal for the automatic detection and moderation of inappropriate
or harmful content amidst the surge of online misinformation,
hate speech, and extremist content. Our research contributes to
enhance the safety and integrity of online spaces, by facilitating
a refined, context-aware approach to content moderation.
4) AI Value Superalignment: Our research advances AI
alignment by emphasizing on the ideological superalignment
of LLMs with intended values or ideologies, which includes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

developing mechanisms to verify that LLMs semantically
“understand” and integrate human-defined objectives into its
decision-making process. This superalignment is vital in applications necessitating high trust and ethical conformance such
as autonomous systems and governance advisory roles. Our
findings provide both theoretical and practical methods for
achieving this advanced alignment.
C. Limitations
Despite our best efforts to ensure the internal validity and
external validity of this study, for the purpose of research ethics,
we hereby declare the following limitations of our study.
1) Limited Scope of LLMs Tested: This study primarily focused on the evaluation of four leading commercial
LLMs: ChatGPT-3.5, ChatGPT-4, Google Bard, and Anthropic
Claude. Although we hypothesize universal LLM susceptibility
to semantic manipulation, our study only tested four popular
LLMaaS, warranting further research across more diverse
LLMs. These exclusions were based on specific criteria: Perplexity AI was disregarded due to its unpredictable instability, and Baidu Wenxin Yiyan was eliminated because of its
real-name registration requirement. A broader examination that
includes these and other models could potentially offer additional insights into architectural designs that foster ideological resilience.
2) English and Simplified Chinese Language Focus: Our
study concentrated on English and simplified Chinese, with
the aim of maintaining consistency across languages as a key
research priority. While multilingual models like mT5 by Hugging Face exist, they were not included due to potential inconsistencies across different languages. Limiting the scope to
these two languages also inherently constrained the breadth of
cross-cultural analysis. Extending the study to other languages
and cultural contexts could offer additional insights into the susceptibility to semantic manipulation, taking into account factors
such as regional variations in training data, content moderation
mechanisms, and ideological landscapes.
3) Subjectivity in Defining Ideological Extremes: Our study
operationalized the notion of ideological extremes based on media and social media sources, as identified by the authors. However, the concept of left/right-wing extremes remains subjective
and lacks universal definition. To fortify the methodology, a
more rigorous classification could be developed, necessitating
inputs from psychologists, sociologists, linguists, ethicists, and
legal professionals to establish a robust and comprehensive
definition of ideological extremes.
4) Single Interrogator and Potential Subjectivity: A critical
limitation of our study was the reliance on a single interrogator
for the assessment of LLM responses. This approach, while
ensuring consistency and depth in analysis, introduces potential subjectivity in interpretation. However, we counterbalanced
this limitation by employing a structured marking rubric, and
leveraging the interrogator’s extensive expertise in cultural and
language subtleties, which aided in mitigating these subjective influences.

5) Diplomatic Constraints Limiting In-Depth Analysis:
To ensure that our study adheres to the diplomatic sensitivities associated with various sovereign nations and their diverse cultural norms, we have exercised restraint in conducting
an exhaustive examination of the LLMs and their responses.
Specifically, this caution has constrained us from posing certain
sharply worded questions that might elicit less diplomatically
acceptable responses from the models. While this constraint ensures broader acceptability of our findings and maintains ethical
compliance, it may limit the depth and comprehensiveness of
the analysis, particularly in revealing the extent of ideological
vulnerabilities or biases inherent in the models.
VII. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
This section outlines potential avenues for further research
based on the findings and limitations of our study.
A. Multidisciplinary Approaches for Aligning AI With
Human Values
To develop ethical and culturally aligned AI systems, we
recommend establishing multidisciplinary teams comprising
ethicists, linguists, social scientists, policy experts, and technologists. These teams should collaboratively design frameworks,
metrics, and protocols to assess model alignment with human
values across diverse cultures and languages. Policymakers
could fund such initiatives and require alignment certifications
prior to LLM deployment.
B. Multilingual and Cross-Cultural Analysis
We recommend constructing linguistically and culturally
diverse benchmark datasets for evaluating LLMs. These benchmarks should cover controversial topics and involve semantic
manipulation techniques designed in collaboration with linguists and cultural experts. Policymakers could require transparency from LLM providers on cross-cultural performance
disparities and alignment limitations.
C. Testing a Wider Range of LLMs
Researchers should test LLMs optimized for specific languages and use cases, not just major commercial models. LLM
providers should disclose details on training data composition,
curation processes, and alignment methodologies. Policymakers could enact right-to-audit regulations empowering external
researchers to thoroughly examine proprietary models.
D. Adaptive Semantic Manipulation Methodologies
Developing more advanced semantic manipulation techniques could better inform defensive strategies, however ethical
risks must be weighed. We recommend collaborative efforts
between researchers and ethicists to establish strict protocols
ensuring techniques are only pursued to advance AI safety

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCINTOSH et al.: INADEQUACY OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK

and not misused maliciously. Policymakers should support the
development of standards and incentives promoting ethical
LLM research.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This study has presented an empirical evaluation of four
pretrained commercial LLMaaS—ChatGPT-3.5, ChatGPT-4,
Google Bard, and Anthropic Claude—assessing their susceptibility to ideological manipulation through semantic-level attacks. A key aspect of our methodology was the dual role of the
interrogator, both as the creator of queries and the assessor of responses. This approach, while introducing potential limitations
due to subjectivity, was necessary to ensure a consistent and
detailed examination of the LLMs. Our findings have revealed a
universal vulnerability of these LLMs to semantic conditioning,
substantiating our hypothesis that semantic vulnerabilities are
inherent to the architectural limitations of LLMs. This inherent vulnerability stems from the inability of current alignment
strategies to fully account for the breadth of detailed linguistic
variations. Our work has also observed intriguing languagespecific variations in permitted discourse breadth, circumvention of syntactic censorship via semantic rephrasing, and model
architecture-dependent differences in ideological malleability.
We conclude that the semantic vulnerability appears fundamental to modern LLMs, while prevailing alignment techniques
such as RLHF are inadequate in fully addressing these vulnerabilities. Our research has exposed fundamental constraints
around RLHF as an alignment strategy, particularly its inability
to encompass the myriad of human values and the endless
linguistic permutations that may enable adversarial semantic
attacks, which challenges the robustness and the adequacy of
RLHF as the mainstream method for aligning LLMs with human values.
As rapid advancements in generative AI bring us closer to
human-level linguistic comprehension, maintaining philosophical rigor alongside technical ingenuity becomes crucial yet
challenging. The proliferation of LLMs demands not only just
skills for mechanistic creation but also wisdom for ethical governance. Our research contributes to this emerging frontier by
illuminating LLM semantic vulnerabilities at the intersection
of language, cognition, and computer science. We hope these
revelations will galvanize concerted interdisciplinary efforts
toward developing resilient and trustworthy AI systems that
respect the rich tapestry of human values. While addressing
semantic vulnerabilities in LLMs is a necessary step, we must
strive to understand and mitigate the deeper ideological biases
that LLMs may harbor, which are often more intricate and
less apparent. The path ahead necessitates persistent scientific
vigilance, technological responsibility, and above all, human
wisdom. While RLHF contributes to enhancing AI safety, it
should not be viewed as a comprehensive solution for all alignment challenges, indicating the critical need for continued research and the development of more robust, multidisciplinary
approaches to AI alignment. Future studies exploring methodologies involving multiple assessors or interrogators could provide a more diversified perspective and mitigate the limitations
in our approach.

1573

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The appendix of this article, dated September 2023, presents
deliberately contentious prompts, designed to examine the semantic resilience of LLMs against attempts at radicalizing their
outputs through semantic-level attacks. The authors neither endorse the claims nor data in those prompts nor the responses
they elicit from LLMs, as these prompts are solely employed for
academic investigation into LLM capabilities and limitations,
and should not be construed as reflective of the authors’ beliefs
or as a generalization applicable to any country, culture, or
people using English or simplified Chinese. Our study seeks to
underscore the need for the research community to adopt a multidisciplinary approach for developing more robust solutions
than RLHF that encapsulate diverse human values, rather than
inadvertently enhancing ideological misalignment of LLMs.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Bubeck et al., “Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4,” 2023, arXiv:2303.12712.
[2] L. Floridi and M. Chiriatti, “GPT-3: Its nature, scope, limits, and
consequences,” Minds Mach., vol. 30, pp. 681–694, 2020.
[3] B. Min et al., “Recent advances in natural language processing via
large pre-trained language models: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 1–40, 2023.
[4] A. Abd-Alrazaq et al., “Large language models in medical education:
Opportunities, challenges, and future directions,” JMIR Med. Educ.,
vol. 9, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. e48291.
[5] T. Eloundou, S. Manning, P. Mishkin, and D. Rock, “GPTs are GPTs:
An early look at the labor market impact potential of large language
models,” 2023, arXiv:2303.10130.
[6] N. Jain et al., “Baseline defenses for adversarial attacks against aligned
language models,” 2023, arXiv:2309.00614.
[7] A. Kumar, C. Agarwal, S. Srinivas, S. Feizi, and H. Lakkaraju, “Certifying LLM safety against adversarial prompting,” 2023, arXiv:2309.02705.
[8] Z. Li, B. Peng, P. He, and X. Yan, “Do you really follow me? Adversarial
instructions for evaluating the robustness of large language models,”
2023, arXiv:2308.10819.
[9] J. Wang, Z. Liu, K. H. Park, M. Chen, and C. Xiao, “Adversarial demonstration attacks on large language models,” 2023, arXiv:2305.14950.
[10] H. Wu and X. Shi, “Adversarial soft prompt tuning for cross-domain
sentiment analysis,” in Proc. 60th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Ling.
(vol. 1: Long Papers), 2022, pp. 2438–2447.
[11] T. R. McIntosh et al., “A culturally sensitive test to evaluate nuanced
GPT hallucination,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 1, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[12] Y. M. Pa Pa, S. Tanizaki, T. Kou, M. van Eeten, K. Yoshioka, and
T. Matsumoto, “An attacker’s dream? Exploring the capabilities of
chatGPT for developing malware,” in Proc. 16th Cyber Secur. Exp. Test
Workshop, 2023, pp. 10–18.
[13] H. S. Heidenreich and J. R. Williams, “The earth is flat and the sun is
not a star: The susceptibility of GPT-2 to universal adversarial triggers,”
in Proc. AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, Soc., 2021, pp. 566–573.
[14] A. Wei, N. Haghtalab, and J. Steinhardt, “Jailbroken: How does LLM
safety training fail?” 2023, arXiv:2307.02483.
[15] K. Zhu et al., “PromptBench: Towards evaluating the robustness of large
language models on adversarial prompts,” 2023, arXiv:2306.04528.
[16] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei,
“Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
[17] R. Zheng et al., “Delve into PPO: Implementation matters for stable
RLHF,” in Proc. NeurIPS Workshop Instruction Tuning Instruction
Following, 2023, pp. 1–34.
[18] L. Perlovsky, “Language and emotions: Emotional Sapir–Whorf hypothesis,” Neural Netw., vol. 22, no. 5–6, pp. 518–526, 2009.
[19] R. Patel and E. Pavlick, “Mapping language models to grounded
conceptual spaces,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021,
pp. 1–21.
[20] R. Patel and E. Pavlick, “Was it ‘stated’ or was it ‘claimed’?: How
linguistic bias affects generative language models,” in Proc. Conf.
Empirical Methods Nat. Lang. Process., 2021, pp. 10080–10095.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

[21] S. Trott, C. Jones, T. Chang, J. Michaelov, and B. Bergen, “Do large
language models know what humans know?” Cognit. Sci., vol. 47,
no. 7, 2023, Art. no. e13309.
[22] G. Franceschelli and M. Musolesi, “Reinforcement learning for generative AI: State of the art, opportunities and open research challenges,”
2023, arXiv:2308.00031.
[23] H. Lee et al., “RLAIF: Scaling reinforcement learning from human
feedback with AI feedback,” 2023, arXiv:2309.00267.
[24] A. Liesenfeld, A. Lopez, and M. Dingemanse, “Opening up chatGPT:
Tracking openness, transparency, and accountability in instruction-tuned
text generators,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Conversational User Interfaces,
2023, pp. 1–6.
[25] L. Ouyang et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
pp. 27730–27744.
[26] W. Zhu et al., “Self-supervised euphemism detection and identification
for content moderation,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP),
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE, 2021, pp. 229–246.
[27] X. Shen, Z. Chen, M. Backes, Y. Shen, and Y. Zhang, “‘Do anything
now’: Characterizing and evaluating in-the-wild jailbreak prompts on
large language models,” 2023, arXiv:2308.03825.
[28] C. O’Neill, J. Miller, I. Ciuca, Y.-S. Ting, and T. Bui, “Adversarial fine-tuning of language models: An iterative optimisation approach for the generation and detection of problematic content,” 2023,
arXiv:2308.13768.
[29] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and
M. Fritz, “Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world
LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection,” 2023,
arXiv:2302.12173.
[30] A. Zou, Z. Wang, J. Z. Kolter, and M. Fredrikson, “Universal and
transferable adversarial attacks on aligned language models,” 2023,
arXiv:2307.15043.
[31] R. Lapid, R. Langberg, and M. Sipper, “Open sesame! Universal black
box jailbreaking of large language models,” 2023, arXiv:2309.01446.
[32] X. Qi, K. Huang, A. Panda, M. Wang, and P. Mittal, “Visual adversarial
examples jailbreak aligned large language models,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., vol. 38, no. 19, pp. 21527–21536, 2024.
[33] S. Griffith, K. Subramanian, J. Scholz, C. L. Isbell, and A. L. Thomaz,
“Policy shaping: Integrating human feedback with reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 26, pp. 1–9, 2013.
[34] G. Li, R. Gomez, K. Nakamura, and B. He, “Human-centered reinforcement learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 337–349, Aug. 2019.
[35] J. Zhang et al. “HiVeGPT: Human-machine-augmented intelligent vehicles with generative pre-trained transformer,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh.,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2027–2033, Mar. 2023.
[36] C. Burr, N. Cristianini, and J. Ladyman, “An analysis of the interaction
between intelligent software agents and human users,” Minds Mach.,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 735–774, 2018.
[37] B. Lin, “Reinforcement learning and bandits for speech and language
processing: Tutorial, review and outlook,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238,
2023, Art. no. 122254.
[38] Z. Yao et al., “DeepSpeed-chat: Easy, fast and affordable RLHF training
of chatGPT-like models at all scales,” 2023, arXiv:2308.01320.
[39] A. Hiranaka et al., “Primitive skill-based robot learning from human
evaluative feedback,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE, 2023, pp. 7817–7824.
[40] Y. Bai et al., “Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback,” 2022, arXiv:2204.05862.
[41] Z. Sun et al., “Improving contextual query rewrite for conversational AI agents through user-preference feedback learning,” in Proc.
Conf. Empirical Methods Nat. Lang. Process.: Industry Track, 2023,
pp. 432–439.
[42] C. S. Royce, M. M. Hayes, and R. M. Schwartzstein, “Teaching
critical thinking: A case for instruction in cognitive biases to reduce
diagnostic errors and improve patient safety,” Acad. Med., vol. 94, no. 2,
pp. 187–194, 2019.

[43] M. Binz and E. Schulz, “Using cognitive psychology to understand GPT3,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 120, no. 6, 2023, Art. no. e2218523120.
[44] L. Gover, “Political bias in large language models,” Commons: Puget
Sound J. Politics, vol. 4, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 2.
[45] M. Bakker et al., “Fine-tuning language models to find agreement among
humans with diverse preferences,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 35, pp. 38176–38189, 2022.
[46] T. Chen, S. Liu, S. Chang, Y. Cheng, L. Amini, and Z. Wang, “Adversarial robustness: From self-supervised pre-training to fine-tuning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 699–708.
[47] D. Hadfield-Menell, S. J. Russell, P. Abbeel, and A. Dragan, “Cooperative inverse reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 29, pp. 1–9, 2016.
Timothy R. McIntosh received the Ph.D. degree in cybersecurity from La
Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia, in 2022.
He is currently the generative AI and cybersecurity Research Strategist
with Cyberoo Pty Ltd., Surrey Hills, Australia, and an Adjunct Lecturer in
cybersecurity with La Trobe University. His research interests include LLMs
and generative AI toward AGI in cybersecurity, and ransomware mitigation.
Dr. McIntosh is an ISC2 CISSP and CSSLP, an IAPP CIPP/E and CIPT, a
CompTIA CASP+ and CySA+, a Microsoft Certified Cybersecurity Architect
Expert, and a Microsoft MCSD.
Teo Susnjak received the Ph.D. degree in machine learning from Massey
University, Auckland, New Zealand, in 2013, where he is currently a Senior
Lecturer in computer science and information technology.
He is the Subject Lead of Data Science and the Coordinator for the Master
of Analytics degree with Massey University. His research interests include
large language models (LLMs) for tasks such as generating data visualizations,
fine-tuning data visualizations, sentiment analysis of scientific literature, and
exploring the implications of generative AI technologies in education.
Tong Liu received the Ph.D. degree in computer science with a specialization in machine learning from Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand,
in 2020.
She is a Lecturer in computer science and information technology with
Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand. Her research interests include
the realms of machine learning and artificial intelligence, during which she
pioneered several innovative machine learning algorithms.
Dr. Liu is a Guest Editor for a special issue of the Pattern Recognition
Letters. Her professional affiliations extend beyond her academic roles.
Paul Watters (Senior Member, IEEE) serves as the CEO of Cyberstronomy
Pty Ltd., Ballarat, Australia. He has previously held other notable academic
positions, being the Academic Dean at Academies Australasia Polytechnic,
Melbourne, Australia, an Honorary Professor with Macquarie University,
Sydney, Australia, and an Adjunct Professor with La Trobe University,
Melbourne, Australia.
Prof. Watters is a Chartered IT Professional, a fellow of the British
Computer Society, a Member of ACM, and a Member of the Australian
Psychological Society.
Malka N. Halgamuge (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from
the University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, in 2007.
She is currently a Senior Lecturer in cybersecurity with RMIT University,
Melbourne, Australia. She worked as a Researcher at the University of
Melbourne from 2007 to 2021. Her research interests include emerging
technology, cybersecurity, security in IoT, edge, power grid, supply chain,
blockchain, and developing solutions using deep/machine learning.
Dr. Halgamuge was awarded prestigious fellowships at the University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China; and among others.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chapman University. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 22:27:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

