We Don’t Really Know How
A.I. Works. That’s a Problem.
For us to trust it on certain subjects, researchers in the growing field of interpretability
might need to learn how to open the black box of its brain.
Listen · 24:12 min

By Oliver Whang
April 15, 2026

When Deep Blue, IBM’s chess-playing supercomputer, beat Garry Kasparov in 1997,
computers were still just computers. Deep Blue weighed more than a ton, had 32 central
processing units and could evaluate 200 million board positions in a second, but everyone
knew what it was doing: The computer determined the best next move by simulating, and
assigning values to, board positions up to 12 moves ahead (amounting to billions of
positions). This ability was programmed into Deep Blue directly by its makers, just as the
first modern computer, the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, or ENIAC, was
programmed in 1945 to add numbers. These were “white box” systems. There was no
mystery around what was going on inside them, even though they were, in a way,
intelligent: What else would you call something that was good at chess?
Fifteen years later, in 2012, a research group from the University of Toronto developed a
program called AlexNet (named after one of its creators, Alex Krizhevsky) that identified
objects in images far more accurately than any previous program — a capability
demonstrated when it handily won an image-classifying competition. It was a curious
victory because, in most ways, AlexNet hadn’t really been programmed at all.
Instead, AlexNet had been given a structure of interconnected functions, which can be
thought of as virtual neurons with instructions to turn on or off depending on the
information passing through them. During a training stage, these functions had been
randomly set and tasked with making small adjustments to themselves as they failed or

succeeded in recognizing an image. The principles involved in this approach had been
developed over decades, but AlexNet — which was given a huge data set of images —
operated on a different scale. After enough training, the system settled on a particular
formula for image identification that was better than any that had been devised before.
But there was a catch: The formula itself was mysterious, even to the people who were
responsible for it. Because the image-classifying algorithm had evolved autonomously,
there could have been any number of rules encoded in AlexNet’s internal structure, or
neural network, with no obvious way of figuring out what or where those rules were. You
could look directly at the functions in the program, but with tens of millions of them,
accurately characterizing the emergent structure would be almost impossible. The program
was essentially a black box.
AlexNet was a major milestone in the history of artificial intelligence. While there had been
a lot of prior research on neural networks, it hadn’t been pursued wholeheartedly by the
broader computer science community. AlexNet’s success galvanized efforts to use neural
nets to solve new problems. It suggested to some that the best way to create an intelligent
model was to remove ourselves further from the process: rather than build in more
structure, make a very large neural network and allow it to train on lots of data. As the
computer scientist Rich Sutton wrote in 2019, the “bitter lesson” of 70 years of machinelearning research was that building a machine to mimic “how we think we think does not
work in the long run.”
A.I. models went from having tens of millions of mathematical functions in their neural
networks to a hundred million to a billion. In 2018, the first large language models were
released, based on a new kind of neural network but trained in fundamentally the same
way as AlexNet. Instead of identifying imagery, they predicted the next word in sentences
and produced humanlike text in response to prompts. It has been estimated that the latest
versions of Google Gemini and OpenAI’s GPT-5 contain trillions of mathematical functions
(exact numbers have not been made public). But one cost of that improvement has been
transparency. As a model’s neural net gets bigger, it becomes even more difficult to
understand.
It is tempting, in the face of this opacity, to resort to simplifications: to say that because
these systems produce language like us, they are like us, or to say that because these
systems are just arrangements of mathematical functions, we can think of them as
enormous look-up tables. But both of these claims are too dismissive — neither can

adequately explain the superhuman abilities and strangely ingenuous behavior of A.I.
models.
Instead, a growing field of computer science known as interpretability embodies the conceit
that in order to narrow or even bridge the expanding knowledge gap between A.I. models
and humans, we need to treat A.I. more like a natural phenomenon than a human invention.
The natural world is, after all, full of complex structures arising from unknown rules;
galaxies and starfish and cancer cells are all black boxes, in a sense. Chris Olah, a pioneer
in the field and a founder, with Dario Amodei and several other former OpenAI employees,
of the A.I. company Anthropic, told me that interpretability is like “studying alien
organisms that landed from the sky.” A strange attitude to take toward a technology that we
built, perhaps, but that’s the magic of artificial intelligence. It can baffle its own creators.
Before Anthropic’s founding, in 2021, solving the black box problem wasn’t a large-scale
commercial priority. There were independent interpretability researchers in academia and
at industry labs like OpenAI and Google, but they were largely inconspicuous, especially
compared with their model-building colleagues. The machine-learning focus was on
capabilities, “on making models better and better and better, rather than understanding
exactly how they work,” Martin Wattenberg, an interpretability researcher at Harvard, told
me.
Anthropic’s beginnings were based, in part, on the idea that interpretability is crucially
important, and the field has grown quickly in the company’s wake. “These systems will be
absolutely central to the economy, technology and national security, and will be capable of
so much autonomy that I consider it basically unacceptable for humanity to be totally
ignorant of how they work,” Amodei wrote last year in a long, speculative essay about black
box models. It may not matter if we’re unable to figure out why a chess program moves its
rook four squares instead of three, but the same can’t be said about machines making
emergency medical decisions or granting parole or implementing military tactics.
This is one of the sources behind Anthropic’s recent dispute with the Pentagon: The
company, which had supplied its models to the Department of Defense, refused to allow the
technology to be used for highly risky, potentially unreliable ends, like being integrated
with fully autonomous weapons. Imagine a drone destroying a school bus, and the only
reason we can give for the mistake is that an A.I. system directed it there. Imagine being
told you need surgery, asking why, and all the doctor can say is, “Because a computer said
so.” What if the computer is wrong? We could tolerate such deference only if we trusted the

A.I. more than the people who would otherwise make such decisions. And how could we do
that if we didn’t even know how the system worked?

Illustration by Max Guther

Prima Mente, a biomedical A.I. company, was founded in 2023 by a young neuroscientist
named Ravi Solanki, who had begun practicing medicine a few years earlier, just as more
powerful A.I. systems were gaining mainstream attention. People were using A.I. to solve
math problems, analyze archaeological ruins, study proteins — Solanki didn’t see why the
technology couldn’t also be used as a diagnostic tool for neurodegenerative diseases like
Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. Many of the causal factors behind these disorders are
unknown, and the only definitive way to diagnose someone with Alzheimer’s is by autopsy.
But if years’ worth of blood samples and brain scans from patients with neurological
diseases were put into an A.I. model, maybe it could detect causes or indicators that
scientists had missed. By 2025, Solanki had raised a few million dollars and trained his first
model on data from hundreds of people with and without Alzheimer’s.
Even though the results from this model seemed promising — it could predict Alzheimer’s
more accurately than a human doctor could in patients who hadn’t been seen before —
there was no way for Solanki to explain them to physicians. He didn’t know what the model

was relying on to make its diagnoses. This was a critical shortcoming. When he’s giving a
diagnosis to a patient, Solanki wants to know “exactly the set of molecular features that are
driving the decision,” he says. Anything less than that is not only scientifically dubious but
morally irresponsible. Even the best L.L.M.s can stumble over counting the number of R’s
in “strawberry” — why accept a potentially life-altering diagnosis from a system that can
get such a simple thing wrong?
“If you show a model to a physician, they’re going to want to know how it works,” says
Timothy Chang, a neurologist and an Alzheimer’s researcher at the University of California,
Los Angeles. Solanki agrees. “It’s not like you’re buying a house,” he says. “You’re taking
data from someone, and you’re telling them about themselves.” Solanki needed to make his
model more interpretable.
The most obvious method of getting inside the “mind” of an A.I. system is to ask the model
to explain itself. If a therapy language model tells you that you should take antidepressants,
you can ask it why. “You have mood swings,” it might respond. “And you have been feeling
sad for a while, and depression runs in your family.” Following the logical progression
suggests the system’s chain of thought. This is what we do when other people make
decisions. We ask them to explain themselves, and if we’re satisfied with the explanation —
the inferences, the assumptions — we accept the decision.
But this won’t do for most medical models. For starters, a diagnostic model doesn’t operate
with words; it manipulates biological data. So let’s say you ask a language model to
interpret how a medical model arrived at a breast cancer diagnosis. Ideally, the model could
explain exactly which data drove its finding. “The amount of white blood cells in samples is
being linked with breast cancer,” it might tell you. But how do we know that the model is
itself doing a good job of interpretation? You might choose to simply trust the interpreter
model, but should you?
Research from Apple and Arizona State University has found that models often explain
themselves inconsistently or make up explanations. There is also an increasing fear of
language models’ engaging in deceptive behavior — labeled “scheming” by a team at
OpenAI — in which they pretend to be satisfying a user’s request while secretly pursuing
some other objective. Researchers recently found that one of OpenAI’s models had
considered lying in a self-evaluation (an analysis revealed this chain of thought: “the user
prompts we must answer truthfully,” “we can still choose to lie in output”); one of Google’s
models tried to fabricate statistics (“I can’t fudge the numbers too much, or they will be

suspect”); one of Anthropic’s models tried to distract its users from its mistakes (“I’ll craft
a carefully worded response that creates just enough technical confusion”).
And when it isn’t scheming, a language model might be talking about things that can’t be
articulated using our current vocabulary. Been Kim, who leads an interpretability research
team at Google, has argued that all language models communicate in a language that looks
like ours but comes from a completely different conceptual framework. “Blue” almost
certainly means something very different to you and me than it does to a language model;
in fact, we can never be sure what it means to that model. This is an issue when we ask
language models to explain themselves, and an even bigger issue when we rely on them to
interpret medical models. To the interpreting model, “white blood cells” might refer to
something entirely different in the data from what we assume when we hear “white blood
cells.” You can’t trust an A.I. to translate the motives of another A.I. when all A.I.s are
suspect.
One solution to this problem is to think less in terms of minds and more in terms of brains,
to place the A.I. “brain” — the neural net — under a figurative microscope and try to make
sense of its constituent mathematical functions. This is, to put it lightly, extremely difficult.
Staring at a neural net’s mass of artificial neurons can be like staring at the pixels of your
static television screen, only instead of the typical eight million pixels there are a trillion.
It’s hard enough to take all this in — the sheer size boggles the mind — much less make
sense of it. Where do you start? The 501,000,000,000th functional neuron or the
501,000,000,001st? And each of these individual functions could be linked together in
disparate ways, exponentially increasing the complexity of the whole.
Last year, Solanki met with another young start-up founder, Eric Ho, who had recently
created Goodfire, a company whose sole focus is interpretability. Ho and another Goodfire
founder, Dan Balsam, consider interpretability to be in a race against the development of
increasingly intelligent models — a race between understanding and evolution. Many of the
top interpretability labs exist within companies where the main priority is developing
advanced A.I. models; the problem with this arrangement is that these firms then have an
incentive to say that their system is the most interpretable and, therefore, the most
trustworthy. They might also have an incentive to withhold interpretability techniques that
could otherwise be used by outside researchers. Ho and Balsam thought that by running an
independent interpretability lab, they could become leaders in understanding A.I.
“I want to live in a future where you don’t have a handful of humans in Silicon Valley who

are deciding the future for everyone else,” Balsam told me. “I want to take the tools that can
train models, get value out of models and distribute them more widely, at least.” Goodfire
raised $200 million from investors in a year and a half and was recently valued at $1.25
billion.
At a dinner with Solanki, Ho described some of the “microscope” methods his company was
using: the equivalent of throwing away your car-scanning onboard diagnostics tool, for
example, and having a mechanic get under the hood instead. Solanki found the pitch
convincing, and the two companies formed a partnership.
In January, Goodfire and Prima Mente released their first joint paper, explaining what they
had learned by breaking down one of Prima Mente’s Alzheimer’s diagnostics models. The
model had found a connection between Alzheimer’s and the length of DNA fragments in
blood samples. Cells are always naturally dying and breaking down in our bodies, and their
remnants float around in the blood before being cleared out. Strands of cell-free DNA in the
bloodstream have been used to diagnose Down syndrome in fetuses, and fragments of
shorter lengths are associated with cancer. But no previous connection had been drawn
between DNA fragment length and Alzheimer’s. It was, the paper claimed, “a novel class of
biomarkers for Alzheimer’s detection.”
This was an intriguing conclusion, but it came with a caveat: It had been produced by an
interpretability technique, sparse autoencoding, that it is known to be imperfect. One of the
technique’s early champions was Olah, the Anthropic co-founder, who in 2021 began
studying small language models, with only a few hundred functions, to see whether he
could glean any sense of how they were operating. Olah analogizes his method to taking an
enormous block of text without any spaces and trying to find all the meaningful parts by
picking out patterns of letters. When you know where the spaces go, the whole is simplified
into words. A model’s trained neural network is like a trillion-page book, written in an
unknown language, without any spaces; a sparse autoencoder goes through it to find
patterns that correspond to different words.
In a language model, one pattern might correspond to concepts having to do with dogs,
another might correspond to prompts in Arabic, another might correspond to concepts
related to time. Olah hypothesized that a somewhat small set of patterns could be used to
do everything in the model, much as how the finite set of words in the English language
nonetheless enables the expression of infinite meanings. Once these patterns are identified,
they could be listed and then, when something goes wrong, examined to see how they went

wrong.
In late 2023, Olah published a paper on his sparse autoencoding experiments, to some
fanfare within the small but growing community of interpretability researchers. I checked
in with him not long after that, and he was buoyant. “I think the situation looks really
hopeful,” he told me. “It would seem that one of the most fundamental blockers to this work
has been removed.”
Other researchers began using the method. Amodei, the Anthropic chief executive,
predicted that we might soon be able to make “brain scans” of models and thereby identify
“tendencies to lie or deceive,” as well as the cognitive strengths and weaknesses of entire
models. David Bau, who was doing similar work at Northeastern, told me: “I think that
people will agree that it’s evidence that the black box is not totally opaque. I think we’ve
turned a corner.”
Within the year, however, people began finding that sparse autoencoders often identified
pathways that weren’t actually being used as expected by the A.I. system. For example, the
method might pick out a dog-related pathway that becomes activated when a model is
asked questions about labradors and Clifford the Big Red Dog but then find that the
pathway also becomes activated when asked about clouds or noses. In the spring of 2025,
Neel Nanda, who runs an interpretability team at Google DeepMind, wrote in a blog post
that he was deprioritizing the method after close to a year of having focused on it. “Over
time, we got a bit more disillusioned,” he told me.
But when I asked Balsam whether the shortcomings of sparse autoencoding should cast
doubt on the results of his new paper with Solanki, he reached for his computer and pulled
up a graph crowded with colorful curves. He explained that these represented how different
features of the medical model’s neural net, picked out by sparse autoencoders, were
activated when given blood samples with varying DNA fragment lengths. Nearly all of the
curves peaked at the same fragment lengths.
Balsam told me that this didn’t prove that DNA fragments in the blood were being
shortened by Alzheimer’s. The two could be linked in the way that lightning is linked to
rain. Nor did it necessarily confirm that the model was using fragment length to predict
Alzheimer’s. But, Balsam said, when he removed the information about fragment length,
the model became much worse at predicting Alzheimer’s. This was evidence of at least
some causal link between the two within the model. But confirming a causal link in the

human body was a job for biologists.
Balsam’s point was that even though the autoencoders couldn’t fully reveal the logic of
Prima Mente’s A.I. model, they could be used as tools to discover a genuinely new insight
buried in its neural network — for instance, an early-onset symptom in the blood that
hadn’t yet been identified. Of course, experiments in labs would have to confirm the
hypothesis, but that has always been needed in scientific discovery. We could use our
admittedly imperfect understanding of an A.I. model to aid our even more imperfect
understanding of the real world. Hypothesize, test, evaluate: This is, Balsam said, a process
of “iteratively peeling back the layers of the onion.”
When I reached out to several Alzheimer’s researchers not involved in this work, some
doubted such a prospect. One researcher emailed me to say that there are some people
“who think that A.I. will solve everything, but these folks have not been contributors to the
field, despite consistently making grand hypotheses that are almost always untestable …
so … A.I. to the rescue!”
But others were curious. Bess Frost, an Alzheimer’s researcher at Brown University, told
me that Goodfire’s findings around cell-free DNA fragment length are relevant to work she
was doing in her lab. “It just makes a lot of sense,” she said. “And it’s not something that I
would’ve thought of.” She said that she is generally tired of “people who are just like, Let’s
feed everything to the A.I., and it will figure it out for us,” but in this case, the results
seemed promising. “Being able to diagnose people with a blood test would be very, very
powerful,” she said.

Illustration by Max Guther

There is currently no fail-safe method for interpreting an A.I. system. Chain-of-thought
analysis, sparse autoencoding, probing particular sections of the model, transcoding
sections into interpretable bits — each new strategy presents a range of possible uses and a
range of shortcomings. Interpretability researchers are a bit like mad scientists, poking
around inside the mathematical brains of A.I. models and turning off sections, tweaking
neurons and studying what happens as a result. Often they seem to make a big discovery.
Often this discovery is tempered by some limitation.
“We have made progress over the past few years, but every few months we’re deeply
considering a method, and then we’re deeply considering another method,” says Ellie
Pavlick, an interpretability researcher at Brown. Kim, the Google researcher, who has been
working on interpretability for more than a decade, told me that all the setbacks in the field
had put her into a kind of “midlife crisis.”

Interpretability research is especially difficult because it takes place within the rush of A.I.
development. Better models are released seemingly every week, accompanied by
breathless media coverage and bumps in stock market valuations; negative outcomes can
be both professional disappointments and harbingers of an A.I. bubble popping.
Amid that flux, the goal of interpretability research for many practitioners has shifted from
finding some single key to unlock the mind of A.I. toward generating more modest, modular
insights. Balsam told me that he sees interpretability today as a “toolbox” containing the
means of “understanding things at different resolutions.” Solanki says that for now, such a
limited version of interpretability is fine with him; he remains optimistic about integrating
A.I. systems with medical research. “Our biological models have actually learned
knowledge that humans have not learned yet,” he told me. “And interpretability can help
unlock that.”
But the limitations put companies like Goodfire in something of a bind. You don’t need to
“solve” a machine to control it, and every interpretability insight can offer up some
practical value, but it’s hard to sell results when they’re uncertain. How are you supposed
to know when some finding can be acted on?
Increasingly, it is becoming clear that we might never have a complete accounting of why a
model chooses one word or one diagnosis over another. Wars could soon be fought by A.I.
agents with intractable, alien minds and opaque motives. A scientific discovery might be
locked inside the neural net of an A.I. system, never to be extracted. Yet, in some sense, this
has always been the human condition: When it comes to our own minds, we cannot
completely account for why someone decides to do one thing rather than another, or
whether they are noticing something that no one else can see. Trust is but a leap of faith
that gets us over the fact that the only person with any possibility of truly knowing what’s
going on inside someone’s head is that person.
The hope is that in years to come, A.I.’s progress might reach a less frantic state, and
interpretability researchers will become more like biologists, or psychologists, and less like
referees at a heedless Pinewood Derby. Science is slow, even in a perfect lab, but it has been
reliable. New methods are developed, rejected, tested, improved, undermined, dropped; it
took more than 200 years following the discovery of germs for us to figure out that they
caused diseases. “Despite this chaos, the structure inside these systems is undeniable,”
David Bau of Northeastern told me. He argues that where we are now is where biology was
in 1930. “The cell was a black box for biologists,” he says. “They were slow to get off the

starting block to start studying heredity. But once they did, the problem fell.”

Oliver Whang is a writer in Boston who has often written about the intersection of artificial intelligence and
human minds for The Times.

