0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page i

T H E EGO T U N N E L

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page ii

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page iii

Th e

Ego Tunnel
the science of the mind
and the myth of the self

Thomas Metzinger

A MEMBER OF THE
PERSEUS BOOKS GROUP
New York

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page iv

Copyright © 2009 by Thomas Metzinger
Published by Basic Books,
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part
of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical articles and reviews. For information, address Basic Books,
387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016-8810.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for
bulk purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and
other organizations. For more information, please contact the Special
Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut
Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, ext.
5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Set in 10.75 point Warnock Pro by the Perseus Books Group
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Metzinger, Thomas, 1958The ego tunnel : the science of the mind and the myth of the self /
Thomas Metzinger.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-465-04567-9 (alk. paper)
1. Consciousness. I. Title.
BF311.M47 2009
126—dc22
2008044399
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page v

To Anja and my family

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page vi

Any theory that makes progress is bound to be initially
counterintuitive.

—daniel c. dennett, The Intentional Stance
(Cambridge, MA 1987, p. 6)

He [Ludwig Wittgenstein] once greeted me with the
question: “Why do people say that it was natural to think
that the sun went round the earth rather than that the
earth turned on its axis?” I replied: “I suppose, because it
looked as if the sun went round the earth.” “Well,” he
asked, “what would it have looked like if it had looked as
if the earth turned on its axis?”

—elizabeth anscombe, An Introduction to
Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (London 1959, p. 151)

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page vii

CON TEN TS

Acknowledgments
Introduction

ix

1
PART ONE

THE CONSCIOUSNESS PROBLEM
1

The Appearance of a World

2

A Tour of the Tunnel

15

25

The Unity of Consciousness 66
PART TWO

IDEA S A ND DISCOVERIES
3

Out of the Body and into the Mind:
Body Image, Out-of-Body
Experiences, and the Virtual Self 75

4 From Ownership to Agency to Free Will 115
5 Philosophical Psychonautics: What
Can We Learn from Lucid Dreaming?
Dreaming

149
vii

133

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

viii

9:28 AM

Page viii

Contents

6

The Empathic Ego

163

The Shared Manifold 174
PART THREE

THE CONSCIOUSNESS REVOLUTION
7

Artificial Ego Machines

187

8 Consciousness Technologies
and the Image of Humankind
9

A New Kind of Ethics
Notes 241
Index 261

219

207

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page ix

AC KN OWLED GMEN TS

This book has not been written for philosophers or scientists. Instead,
it is my ﬁrst attempt to introduce a wider public to what I think are the
truly important issues in consciousness research today. The selection
of relevant philosophical issues and new empirical insights is entirely
my own—and of course hopelessly incomplete and necessarily superﬁcial. But I do hope this book will give interested lay readers a realistic
view of the picture of self-consciousness and the human mind now
emerging—and of the accompanying challenges all of us will have to
face in the future.
Of the many people who have supported me in this project, my ﬁrst
thanks go to Jennifer Windt, who has spent countless hours helping me
with the English version. I have learned a great deal from her. It is diﬃcult to write a nonacademic book in a language other than your own,
and if I have at least partly succeeded, it is due to her accuracy, conscientiousness, and reliability. I then found a superbly professional editor
in Sara Lippincott. I am deeply indebted to both of them. Among the
many colleagues who have supported me, I am particularly grateful to
Susan Blackmore, Olaf Blanke, Peter Brugger, Daniel Dennett, Vittorio
Gallese, Allan Hobson, Victor Lamme, Bigna Lenggenhager, Antoine
Lutz, Angelo Maravita, Wolf Singer, Tej Tadi, and Giulio Tononi. This
work was in part supported by the COGITO Foundation (Switzerland),
the DISCOS Project (“Disorders and Coherence of the Embodied Self,”

ix

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

x

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page x

Acknowledgments

an EU Marie Curie Research Training Network), and a Fellowship at Europe’s best Institute for Advanced Research, the Wissenschaftskolleg zu
Berlin.
Thomas Metzinger
January 2009

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 1

INTRODUCTION

In this book, I will try to convince you that there is no such thing as a
self. Contrary to what most people believe, nobody has ever been or had
a self. But it is not just that the modern philosophy of mind and cognitive neuroscience together are about to shatter the myth of the self. It
has now become clear that we will never solve the philosophical puzzle
of consciousness—that is, how it can arise in the brain, which is a purely
physical object—if we don’t come to terms with this simple proposition:
that to the best of our current knowledge there is no thing, no indivisible entity, that is us, neither in the brain nor in some metaphysical realm
beyond this world. So when we speak of conscious experience as a subjective phenomenon, what is the entity having these experiences?
There are other important issues in the quest to probe our inner
nature—new, exciting theories about emotions, empathy, dreaming, rationality, recent discoveries about free will and the conscious control of
our actions, even about machine consciousness—and they are all valuable, as the building blocks of a deeper understanding of ourselves. I will
touch on many of them in this book. What we currently lack, however,
is the big picture—a more general framework we can work with. The
new mind sciences have generated a ﬂood of relevant data but no model
that can, at least in principle, integrate all these data. There is one central question we have to confront head on: Why is there always someone
having the experience? Who is the feeler of your feelings and the
dreamer of your dreams? Who is the agent doing the doing, and what is

1

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 2

THE EGO TUNNEL

the entity thinking your thoughts? Why is your conscious reality your
conscious reality?
This is the heart of the mystery. If we want not just the building
blocks but a uniﬁed whole, these are the essential questions. There is a
new story, a provocative and perhaps shocking one, to be told about this
mystery: It is the story of the Ego Tunnel.
The person telling you this story is a philosopher, but one who has
closely cooperated with neuroscientists, cognitive scientists, and researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence for many years. Unlike many of my
philosopher colleagues, I think that empirical data are often directly relevant to philosophical issues and that a considerable part of academic philosophy has ignored such data for much too long. The best philosophers
in the ﬁeld clearly are analytical philosophers, those in the tradition of
Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein: In the past ﬁfty years, the
strongest contributions have come from analytical philosophers of mind.
However, a second aspect has been neglected too much: phenomenology,
the ﬁne-grained and careful description of inner experience as such. In
particular, altered states of consciousness (such as meditation, lucid
dreaming, or out-of-body experiences) and psychiatric syndromes (such
as schizophrenia or Cotard’s syndrome, in which patients may actually
believe they do not exist) should not be philosophical taboo zones. Quite
the contrary: If we pay more attention to the wealth and the depth of
conscious experience, if we are not afraid to take consciousness seriously
in all of its subtle variations and borderline cases, then we may discover
exactly those conceptual insights we need for the big picture.
In the chapters that follow, I will lead you through the ongoing Consciousness Revolution. Chapters 1 and 2 introduce basic ideas of consciousness research and the inner landscape of the Ego Tunnel. Chapter
3 examines out-of-body experiences, virtual bodies, and phantom limbs.
Chapter 4 deals with ownership, agency, and free will; chapter 5 with
dreams and lucid dreaming; chapter 6 with empathy and mirror neurons; and chapter 7 with artiﬁcial consciousness and the possibility of
postbiotic Ego Machines. All these considerations will help us to further
map out the Ego Tunnel. The two ﬁnal chapters address some of the
consequences of these new scientiﬁc insights into the nature of the con-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 3

Introduction

3

scious mind-brain: the ethical challenges they pose and the social and
cultural changes they may produce (and sooner than we think), given
the naturalistic turn in the image of humankind. I close by arguing that
ultimately we will need a new “ethics of consciousness.” If we arrive at a
comprehensive theory of consciousness, and if we develop ever more
sophisticated tools to alter the contents of subjective experience, we will
have to think hard about what a good state of consciousness is. We urgently need fresh and convincing answers to questions like the following: Which states of consciousness do we want our children to have?
Which states of consciousness do we want to foster, and which do we
want to ban on ethical grounds? Which states of consciousness can we
inﬂict upon animals, or upon machines? Obviously, I cannot provide deﬁnitive answers to such questions; instead, the concluding chapters are
meant to draw attention to the important new discipline of neuroethics
while at the same time widening our perspective.

THE PHENOMENA L SELF-MODEL
Before I introduce the Ego Tunnel, the central metaphor that will guide
the discussion from here onward, it will be helpful to consider an experiment that strongly suggests the purely experiential nature of the self. In
1998, University of Pittsburgh psychiatrists Matthew Botvinick and
Jonathan Cohen conducted a now-classic experiment in which healthy
subjects experienced an artiﬁcial limb as part of their own body. The
subjects observed a rubber hand lying on the desk in front of them, with
their own corresponding hand concealed from their view by a screen.
The visible rubber hand and the subject’s unseen hand were then synchronously stroked with a probe. The experiment is easy to replicate:
After a certain time (sixty to ninety seconds, in my case), the famous
rubber-hand illusion emerges. Suddenly, you experience the rubber
hand as your own, and you feel the repeated strokes in this rubber hand.
Moreover, you feel a full-blown “virtual arm”—that is, a connection
from your shoulder to the fake hand on the table in front of you.
The most interesting feature I noticed when I underwent this experiment was the strange tingling sensation in my shoulder shortly before

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

4

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 4

THE EGO TUNNEL

Figure 1: The rubber-hand illusion. A healthy subject experiences an artificial limb as part
of her own body. The subject observes a facsimile of a human hand while her own hand is
concealed (gray square). Both the artificial rubber hand and the invisible hand are
stroked repeatedly and synchronously with a probe. The light areas around the hand
and the dark areas in the index finger indicate the respective tactile and visual receptive
fields for neurons in the premotor cortex. The illustration on the right shows the subject’s
illusion as the felt strokes are aligned with the seen strokes of the probe (the dark areas
show areas of heightened activity in the brain; the phenomenally experienced, illusory
position of the arm is indicated by the light outline). The resulting activation of neurons
in the premotor cortex is demonstrated by experimental data. (M. Botvinick & J. Cohen,
“Rubber Hand ‘Feels’ Touch That Eyes See,” Nature 391:756, 1998.) Figure by Litwak
illustrations studio, 2004.

the onset of the illusion—shortly before, as it were, my “soul arm” or “astral limb” slipped from the invisible physical arm into the rubber hand. Of
course, there is no such thing as a ghostly arm, and probably no such thing
as an astral body, either. What you feel in the rubber-hand illusion is what
I call the content of the phenomenal self-model (PSM)—the conscious
model of the organism as a whole that is activated by the brain. (“Phenomenal” is used here, and throughout, in the philosophical sense, as pertaining to what is known purely experientially, through the way in which
things subjectively appear to you.) The content of the PSM is the Ego.
The PSM of Homo sapiens is probably one of nature’s best inventions. It is an eﬃcient way to allow a biological organism to consciously
conceive of itself (and others) as a whole. Thus it enables the organism
to interact with its internal world as well as with the external environ-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 5

Introduction

5

ment in an intelligent and holistic manner. Most animals are conscious
to one degree or another, but their PSM is not the same as ours. Our
evolved type of conscious self-model is unique to the human brain, in
that by representing the process of representation itself, we can catch
ourselves—as Antonio Damasio would call it—in the act of knowing. We
mentally represent ourselves as representational systems, in phenomenological real-time. This ability turned us into thinkers of thoughts and
readers of minds, and it allowed biological evolution to explode into cultural evolution. The Ego is an extremely useful instrument—one that
has helped us understand one another through empathy and mindreading. Finally, by allowing us to externalize our minds through cooperation and culture, the Ego has enabled us to form complex societies.
What lessons can be learned from the rubber-hand illusion? The ﬁrst
point is simple to understand: Whatever is part of your PSM, whatever
is part of your conscious Ego, is endowed with a feeling of “mineness,” a
conscious sense of ownership. It is experienced as your limb, your tactile
sensation, your feeling, your body, or your thought. But then there is a
deeper question: Isn’t there something more to the conscious self than
the mere subjective experience of ownership for body parts or mental
states? Isn’t there something like “global ownership,” a deeper sense of
selfhood having to do with owning and controlling your body as a
whole? What about the experience of identifying with it? Could this
deep sense of selfhood perhaps be experimentally manipulated? When I
ﬁrst experienced the rubber-hand illusion, I immediately thought it
would be important to see whether this would also work with a whole
rubber body or an image of yourself. Could one create a full-body analog
of the rubber-hand illusion? Could the entire self be transposed to a location outside of the body?
As a matter of fact, there are phenomenal states in which people have
the robust feeling of being outside their physical body—these are the socalled out-of-body experiences, or OBEs. OBEs are a well-known class
of states in which one undergoes the highly realistic illusion of leaving
one’s physical body, usually in the form of an etheric double, and moving outside of it. Phenomenologically, the subject of experience is located in this double. Obviously, if one seriously wants to understand

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

6

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 6

THE EGO TUNNEL

what the conscious self is, these experiences are of great philosophical
and scientiﬁc relevance. Could they be created in the lab?
One of the neuroscientists I am proud to collaborate with is Olaf
Blanke, a brilliant young neurologist at the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology in Lausannne, who was the ﬁrst scientist to trigger an OBE
by directly stimulating the brain of a patient with an electrode. There
are typically two representations of one’s body in these experiences: the
visual one (the sight of your own body, lying on the bed, say, or on an
operating table) and the felt one, in which you feel yourself to be hovering above or ﬂoating in space. Interestingly, this second body-model is
the content of the PSM. This is where the Ego is. In a series of virtualreality experiments, Olaf, his PhD student Bigna Lenggenhager, and I attempted to create artiﬁcial OBEs and full-body illusions (see chapter 3).
During these illusions, subjects localized themselves outside their body
and transiently identiﬁed with a computer-generated, external image of
it. What these experiments demonstrate is that the deeper, holistic
sense of self is not a mystery immune to scientiﬁc exploration—it is a
form of conscious representational content, and it can be selectively manipulated under carefully controlled experimental conditions.
Throughout the book, I use one central metaphor for conscious experience: the “Ego Tunnel.” Conscious experience is like a tunnel. Modern neuroscience has demonstrated that the content of our conscious
experience is not only an internal construct but also an extremely selective way of representing information. This is why it is a tunnel: What we
see and hear, or what we feel and smell and taste, is only a small fraction
of what actually exists out there. Our conscious model of reality is a lowdimensional projection of the inconceivably richer physical reality surrounding and sustaining us. Our sensory organs are limited: They
evolved for reasons of survival, not for depicting the enormous wealth
and richness of reality in all its unfathomable depth. Therefore, the ongoing process of conscious experience is not so much an image of reality
as a tunnel through reality.
Whenever our brains successfully pursue the ingenious strategy of
creating a uniﬁed and dynamic inner portrait of reality, we become con-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 7

Introduction

7

scious. First, our brains generate a world-simulation, so perfect that we
do not recognize it as an image in our minds. Then, they generate an inner image of ourselves as a whole. This image includes not only our
body and our psychological states but also our relationship to the past
and the future, as well as to other conscious beings. The internal image
of the person-as-a-whole is the phenomenal Ego, the “I” or “self ” as it
appears in conscious experience; therefore, I use the terms “phenomenal
Ego” and “phenomenal self ” interchangeably. The phenomenal Ego is
not some mysterious thing or little man inside the head but the content
of an inner image—namely, the conscious self-model, or PSM. By placing the self-model within the world-model, a center is created. That center is what we experience as ourselves, the Ego. It is the origin of what
philosophers often call the ﬁrst-person perspective. We are not in direct
contact with outside reality or with ourselves, but we do have an inner
perspective. We can use the word “I.” We live our conscious lives in the
Ego Tunnel.
In ordinary states of consciousness, there is always someone having
the experience—someone consciously experiencing himself as directed
toward the world, as a self in the act of attending, knowing, desiring,
willing, and acting. There are two major reasons for this. First, we possess an integrated inner image of ourselves that is ﬁrmly anchored in our
feelings and bodily sensations; the world-simulation created by our
brains includes the experience of a point of view. Second, we are unable
to experience and introspectively recognize our self-models as models;
much of the self-model is, as philosophers might say, transparent.
Transparency simply means that we are unaware of the medium
through which information reaches us. We do not see the window but
only the bird ﬂying by. We do not see neurons ﬁring away in our brain
but only what they represent for us. A conscious world-model active in
the brain is transparent if the brain has no chance of discovering that it
is a model—we look right through it, directly onto the world, as it were.
The central claim of this book—and the theory behind it, the self-model
theory of subjectivity—is that the conscious experience of being a self
emerges because a large part of the PSM in your brain is transparent.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

8

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 8

THE EGO TUNNEL

The Ego, as noted, is simply the content of your PSM at this moment
(your bodily sensations, your emotional state, your perceptions, memories, acts of will, thoughts). But it can become the Ego only because you
are constitutionally unable to realize that all this is just the content of a
simulation in your brain. It is not reality itself but an image of reality—
and a very special one indeed. The Ego is a transparent mental image:
You—the physical person as a whole—look right through it. You do not
see it. But you see with it. The Ego is a tool for controlling and planning
your behavior and for understanding the behavior of others. Whenever
the organism needs this tool, the brain activates a PSM. If—as, for instance, in dreamless deep sleep—the tool is not needed anymore, it is
turned oﬀ.
It must be emphasized that although our brains create the Ego Tunnel, no one lives in this tunnel. We live with it and through it, but there
is no little man running things inside our head. The Ego and the Tunnel
are evolved representational phenomena, a result of dynamical selforganization on many levels. Ultimately, subjective experience is a biological data format, a highly speciﬁc mode of presenting information
about the world by letting it appear as if it were an Ego’s knowledge. But
no such things as selves exist in the world. A biological organism, as
such, is not a self. An Ego is not a self, either, but merely a form of representational content—namely, the content of a transparent self-model activated in the organism’s brain.
Variations of this tunnel metaphor illustrate other new ideas in mind
science: What would it mean for an Ego Tunnel to branch out to include
other Ego Tunnels? What happens to the Ego Tunnel during the dream
state? Can machines possess an artiﬁcial form of self-consciousness, and
can they develop a proper Ego Tunnel? How do empathy and social
cognition work; how can communication take place from one tunnel to
the next? Finally, of course, we must ask: Is it possible to leave the Ego
Tunnel?
The idea of an Ego Tunnel is based on an older notion that has been
around for quite some time now. It is the concept of a “reality tunnel,”
which can be found in research on virtual reality and the programming
of advanced video games, or in the popular work of nonacademic

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 9

Introduction

9

philosophers such as Robert Anton Wilson and Timothy Leary. The
general idea is this: Yes, there is an outside world, and yes, there is an
objective reality, but in moving through this world, we constantly apply
unconscious ﬁlter mechanisms, and in doing so, we unknowingly construct our own individual world, which is our “reality tunnel.” We are
never directly in touch with reality as such, because these ﬁlters prevent
us from seeing the world as it is. The ﬁltering mechanisms are our sensory systems and our brain, the architecture of which we inherited from
our biological ancestors, as well as our prior beliefs and implicit assumptions. The construction process is largely invisible; in the end, we
see only what our reality tunnel allows us to see, and most of us are
completely unaware of this fact.
From a philosopher’s point of view, there is a lot of nonsense in this
popular notion. We don’t create an individual world but only a worldmodel. Moreover, the whole idea of potentially being directly in touch
with reality is a sort of romantic folklore; we know the world only by using representations, because (correctly) representing something is what
knowing is. Also, the Ego Tunnel is not about what psychologists call
“conﬁrmation bias”—that is, our tendency to notice and assign signiﬁcance to observations that conﬁrm our beliefs and expectations, while
ﬁltering out or rationalizing away observations that do not. Nor is it true
that we can never get out of the tunnel or know anything about the outside world: Knowledge is possible, for instance, through the cooperation
and communication of large groups of people—scientiﬁc communities
that design and test theories, constantly criticize one another, and exchange empirical data and new hypotheses. Finally, the popular notion
of a reality tunnel is playfully used in simply too many ways and contexts
and therefore remains hopelessly vague.
In the ﬁrst chapter, I conﬁne discussion to the phenomenon of conscious experience and develop a better and richer understanding of why
exactly it is exclusively internal. One question to be addressed is, How
can all this take place inside the brain and at the same time create the
robust experience of living in a reality that is experienced as an external
reality? We want to understand how what Finnish philosopher and neuroscientist Antti Revonsuo calls an “out-of-brain experience” is possible:

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

10

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 10

THE EGO TUNNEL

the experience you have all the time—for instance, right now, as you are
reading this book. The robust experience of not being in a tunnel, of being directly and immediately in touch with external reality, is one of the
most remarkable features of human consciousness. You even have it
during an out-of-body experience.
To conﬁne oneself to studying consciousness as such means to consider the phenomenal content of one’s mental representations—that is,
how they feel to you from the ﬁrst-person perspective, what it is like
(subjectively, privately, inwardly) to have them. For example, the predominant phenomenal content of seeing a red rose is the quality of redness itself. In the conscious experience of smelling a mixture of amber
and sandalwood, the phenomenal content is that raw subjective quality
of “amber-ness” and “sandalwood-ness,” ineﬀable and apparently simple.
In experiencing an emotion—say, feeling happy and relaxed—the phenomenal content is the feeling itself and not whatever it refers to.
All evidence now points to the conclusion that phenomenal content
is determined locally, not by the environment at all but by internal
properties of the brain only. Moreover, the relevant properties are the
same regardless of whether the red rose is there in front of you or
merely imagined or dreamed about. The subjective sandalwood-andamber experience doesn’t require incense, it doesn’t even require a
nose; in principle it can also be elicited by stimulating the right combination of glomeruli in your olfactory bulb. Glomeruli (there are some
two thousand of them) take input from one type or another of your olfactory receptor cells. If the uniﬁed sensory quality of smelling sandalwood and amber typically involves activating smell receptor cells of
type 18, 93, 143, and 211 in your nose, then we would expect to get the
same conscious experience—an identical odor—by stimulating the corresponding glomeruli with an electrode. The question is, What is the
minimally suﬃcient set of neural properties? Could we selectively elicit
exactly the same phenomenon by doing even less, possibly at another
location in the brain? Most neuroscientists, and probably the majority
of philosophers as well, would answer yes: Activate the minimal neural
correlate of a given conscious experience and you get the conscious experience itself.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 11

Introduction

11

The same general idea holds for more complex states: Their phenomenal content is precisely that aspect of a state (say, of happiness plus
relaxation) that not only emerges naturally in everyday situations but
can also be caused by a psychoactive substance—or, at least in principle,
triggered by an evil neuroscientist experimenting on a living brain in a
vat. The problem of consciousness is all about subjective experience,
about the structure of our inner life, and not about knowledge of the
outer world.
One way of looking at the Ego Tunnel is as a complex property of the
global neural correlate of consciousness (NCC). The NCC is that set of
neurofunctional properties in your brain suﬃcient to bring about a conscious experience. There is a speciﬁc NCC for the redness of the rose
you experience, another for the perceptual object (that is, the rose as a
whole), and yet another underlying your accompanying feeling of happiness and relaxation. But there is also a global NCC—that is, a much
larger set of neural properties underlying consciousness as a whole, underpinning your experiential model of the world, the totality of everything you subjectively feel. The incessant information ﬂow in this global
NCC is what creates the tunnel, the world in which you live your conscious life.
But what is this “you”? As I claimed at the outset, we will never have
a truly satisfying comprehensive scientiﬁc theory of the human mind if
we don’t dissolve the core of the problem. If we want everything to fall
into place—if we want to understand the big picture—then this is the
challenge. Why is consciousness subjective? The most important question I seek to answer is why a conscious world-model almost invariably
has a center: a me, an Ego, an experiencing self. What exactly is the self
that has the rubber-hand illusion? What exactly is it that apparently
leaves the physical body in an OBE? What exactly is it that is reading
these lines right now?
An Ego Tunnel is a consciousness tunnel that has evolved the additional property of creating a robust ﬁrst-person perspective, a subjective
view of the world. It is a consciousness tunnel plus an apparent self. This
is the challenge: If we want the big picture, we need to know how a genuine sense of selfhood appears. We have to explain your experience of

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

12

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 12

THE EGO TUNNEL

yourself as feeling the tactile sensation in the rubber hand, of yourself as
understanding the sentences you’re reading right now. This genuine
conscious sense of selfhood is the deepest form of inwardness, much
deeper than just being “in the brain” or “in a simulated world in the
brain.” This nontrivial form of inwardness is what this book is about.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

PART ONE

Page 13

THE
CONSCIOUSNESS
PROBLEM

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 14

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 15

one


THE A PPEA RA NCE OF A WORLD

Consciousness is the appearance of a world. The essence of the phenomenon of conscious experience is that a single and uniﬁed reality becomes present: If you are conscious, a world appears to you. This is
true in dreams as well as in the waking state, but in dreamless deep
sleep, nothing appears: The fact that there is a reality out there and that
you are present in it is unavailable to you; you do not even know that
you exist.
Consciousness is a very special phenomenon, because it is part of the
world and contains it at the same time. All our data indicate that consciousness is part of the physical universe and is an evolving biological
phenomenon. Conscious experience, however, is much more than
physics plus biology—more than a fantastically complex, dancing pattern of neural ﬁring in your brain. What sets human consciousness
apart from other biologically evolved phenomena is that it makes a reality appear within itself. It creates inwardness; the life process has become aware of itself.
Judging from the available data on animal brains and evolutionary
continuity, the appearance of worlds in biological nervous systems is a
recent phenomenon, perhaps only a few million years old. In Darwinian
evolution, an early form of consciousness might have arisen some 200
15

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

16

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 16

THE EGO TUNNEL

million years ago in the primitive cerebral cortices of mammals, giving
them bodily awareness and the sense of a surrounding world and guiding their behavior. My intuition is that birds, reptiles, and ﬁsh have long
had some sort of awareness too. In any case, an animal that cannot reason or speak a language can certainly have transparent phenomenal
states—and that is all it takes to make a world appear in consciousness.
Such well-known consciousness researchers and theoretical neurobiologists as Anil Seth, Bernard Baars, and D. B. Edelman have established
seventeen criteria for brain structures subserving consciousness, and
the evidence for the existence of such structures not only in mammals
but also in birds and potentially in octopi is overwhelming. The empirical evidence for animal consciousness is now far beyond any reasonable
doubt. Like us, animals are naive realists, and if they have, say, color
sensations, it is plausible to assume that these appear to them with the
same quality of directness, certainty, and immediacy as they do to us.
But the philosophical point is that we really do not know. These are exactly the sort of questions we can consider only after we have constructed a satisfactory theory of consciousness.
A much more recent phenomenon emerged only a couple of thousand years ago—the conscious formation of theories in the minds of human philosophers and scientists. Thus the life process became reﬂected
not only in conscious individual organisms but also in groups of human
beings trying to understand the emergence of self-conscious minds as
such—that is, what it means that something can “appear within itself.”
The most fascinating feature of the human mind, perhaps, is not simply
that it can sometimes be conscious, or even that it allows for the emergence of a PSM. The truly remarkable fact is that we can also attend to
the content of our PSM and form concepts about it. We can communicate about it with one another, and we can experience this as our own
activity. The process of attending to our thoughts and emotions, to our
perceptions and bodily sensations, is itself integrated into the selfmodel. This property, as noted, probably distinguishes us from most
other animals on this planet: the ability to turn the ﬁrst-person perspective inward, to explore our emotional states and attend to our cognitive
processes. As philosophers say, these are “higher-order” levels of the

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 17

The Appearance of a World

17

PSM. They allowed us to become aware of the fact that we are representational systems.
Over the centuries, the theories we have devised have gradually
changed our image of ourselves, and in so doing they have subtly altered
the contents of consciousness. True, consciousness is a robust phenomenon; it doesn’t change simply because of the opinions we have about it.
But it does change through practice (think of wine connoisseurs, perfume designers, musical geniuses). Human beings in other historical
epochs—during the Vedic period of ancient India, say, or during the European Middle Ages, when God was still perceived as a real and constant presence—likely knew kinds of subjective experience almost
inaccessible to us today. Many deep forms of conscious self-experience
have become all but impossible due to philosophical enlightenment and
the rise of science and technology—at least for the many millions of
well-educated, scientiﬁcally informed people. Theories change social
practice, and practice eventually changes brains, the way we perceive
the world. Through the theory of neural networks, we have learned that
the distinction between structure and content—between the carrier of a
mental state and its meaning—is not as clear-cut as is often assumed.
Meaning does change structure, though slowly. And the structure in
turn determines our inner lives, the ﬂow of conscious experience.
In the early 1970s, after the heyday of behaviorism, interest in consciousness as a serious research topic began to rise. In several scientiﬁc
disciplines, the topic of subjective experience gradually became a secret
research frontier. Then, in the last decade of the twentieth century, a
number of eminent neuroscientists accepted consciousness as a proper
target for rigorous research. Now things developed very quickly. In 1994,
after a conference of consciousness researchers in Tucson, Arizona, I
helped found a new organization, the Association for the Scientiﬁc
Study of Consciousness (ASSC), which is aimed at drawing together
the more rigorous researchers in science and philosophy. The number
of conferences and journal articles increased steeply. The following
year, I edited a collection of philosophical articles entitled Conscious Experience. When one of my ASSC cofounders, Australian philosopher
David Chalmers, and I compiled the bibliography, spanning the period

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

18

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 18

THE EGO TUNNEL

1970–1995, it contained about a thousand entries. Ten years later, when I
updated this bibliography for the ﬁfth German edition, it had almost
twenty-seven hundred entries. At this point, I gave up my attempt to include all of the new literature on consciousness; it was simply no longer
possible. The ﬁeld is now well established and developing steadily.
In the meantime, we have learned many lessons. We have learned
how great the fear of reductionism is, in the humanities as well as
among the general public, and how immense the market is for mysterianism. The straightforward philosophical answer to the widespread fear
that philosophers or scientists will “reduce consciousness” is that reduction is a relationship between theories, not phenomena. No serious empirical researcher and no philosopher wants to “reduce consciousness”;
at best, one theory about how the contents of conscious experience
arose can be reduced to another theory. Our theories about phenomena
change, but the phenomena stay the same. A beautiful rainbow continues to be a beautiful rainbow even after it has been explained in terms of
electromagnetic radiation. Adopting a primitive scientistic ideology
would be just as bad as succumbing to mysterianism. Furthermore,
most people would agree that the scientiﬁc method is not the only way
of gaining knowledge.
But this is not the whole story. Frequently, a deeper, unarticulated insight may lie behind our uneasiness with reductive approaches to the
conscious mind. We know that our beliefs about consciousness can subtly change what we perceive, inﬂuencing the very contents and functional proﬁle of subjective experience itself. Some fear that a materialistic
disenchantment, along with advances in the sciences of the mind, may
have unwanted social and cultural consequences. As I point out in the
concluding chapters of this book, these voices are absolutely right: This
is an important aspect of the development of the mind sciences. We
have learned that consciousness—like science itself—is a culturally embedded phenomenon.
We have also come to understand that consciousness is not an all-ornothing aﬀair, a phenomenon that either does or does not exist. It is a
graded phenomenon and comes in many diﬀerent shades. Consciousness

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 19

The Appearance of a World

19

is also not a unitary phenomenon but has many discernible aspects:
memory, attention, feelings, the perception of color, self-awareness, and
higher-order thought. Nevertheless, the essence of the phenomenon—
what I call the appearance of a world—seems to be preserved throughout. One of the essential features of consciousness is that it situates you
in this world. When you wake up in the morning, you experience yourself as existing at a speciﬁc time, at a single location, and embedded in a
scene: A single and integrated situation emerges. The same is true for
dreams or hallucinations, in which you not only experience yourself but
also experience yourself in the context of a particular situation, as part
of a world that has just appeared. We have learned that consciousness
reaches down into the animal kingdom. We have learned about psychiatric disorders and brain lesions, about coma and minimally conscious
states, about dreams, lucid dreams, and other altered states of consciousness. All this has led to a general picture of a complex phenomenon that comes in diﬀerent ﬂavors and strengths. There is no single
on-oﬀ switch. The fact that consciousness is a graded phenomenon
sometimes causes conceptual problems. At the same time, we are already beginning to ﬁnd the ﬁrst neural correlates of speciﬁc forms of
conscious content. Eventually we should be able to discern the minimal
set of properties our brains require to activate speciﬁc qualities of experience, such as the apricot-pink color of the evening sky or the scent of
amber and sandalwood.
However, what we do not know is how far discovering such neural
correlates will go toward explaining consciousness. Correlation is not
causation, nor is it explanation. And if certain aspects of consciousness
are ineﬀable, we obviously cannot correlate them with states in our
brains. We have no good understanding of what it means to say that
consciousness is “subjective,” a “private” phenomenon tied to individual
selves. But pinning down the neural correlates of speciﬁc conscious contents will lay the foundation for future neurotechnology. As soon as we
know the suﬃcient physical correlates of apricot-pink or sandalwoodamber, we will in principle be able to activate these states by stimulating the brain in an appropriate manner. We will be able to modulate our

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

20

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 20

THE EGO TUNNEL

sensations of color or smell, and intensify or extinguish them, by stimulating or inhibiting the relevant groups of neurons. This may also be true
for emotional states, such as empathy, gratitude, or religious ecstasy.
First things ﬁrst, however. Before we can understand what the self is,
we must look at the current status of consciousness science by taking a
brief tour of the landscape of consciousness, with its unique complex of
problems. There has been considerable progress, but as far as our conscious minds are concerned, we still live in prehistoric times. Our theories about consciousness are as naive as the ﬁrst ideas cavemen probably
had about the true nature of the stars. Scientiﬁcally, we are at the very
beginning of a true science of consciousness.
The conscious brain is a biological machine—a reality engine—that
purports to tell us what exists and what doesn’t. It is unsettling to discover that there are no colors out there in front of your eyes. The apricotpink of the setting sun is not a property of the evening sky; it is a
property of the internal model of the evening sky, a model created by
your brain. The evening sky is colorless. The world is not inhabited by
colored objects at all. It is just as your physics teacher in high school told
you: Out there, in front of your eyes, there is just an ocean of electromagnetic radiation, a wild and raging mixture of diﬀerent wavelengths.
Most of them are invisible to you and can never become part of your
conscious model of reality. What is really happening is that the visual
system in your brain is drilling a tunnel through this inconceivably rich
physical environment and in the process is painting the tunnel walls in
various shades of color. Phenomenal color. Appearance. For your conscious eyes only.
Still, this is only the beginning. There is no clean one-to-one mapping of consciously experienced colors to physical properties “out there.”
Many diﬀerent mixtures of wavelengths can cause the same sensation of
apricot-pink (scientists call these mixtures metamers). It is interesting to
note how the perceived colors of objects stay relatively constant under
varying conditions of illumination. An apple, for instance, looks green
to us at midday, when the main illumination is white sunlight, and also
at sunset, when the main illumination is red with a lot of yellow. Subjective color constancy is a fantastic feature of human color perception, a

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 21

The Appearance of a World

21

major neurocomputational achievement. On the other hand, you can
consciously experience the same physical property, say, the hot kitchen
stove in front of you, as two diﬀerent conscious qualities. You can experience it as the sensation of warmth and as the sensation of glowing red,
as something you feel on your skin and as something you project into a
space in front of your eyes.
Nor must your eyes be open to enjoy color experience. Obviously,
you can also dream of an apricot-pink evening sky, or you can hallucinate one. Or you can enjoy an even more dramatic color experience under the inﬂuence of a hallucinogenic drug, while staring into the void
behind your closed eyelids. Converging data from modern consciousness research show that what is common to all possible conscious sensations of apricot-pink is not so much the existence of an object “out
there” as a highly speciﬁc pattern of activation in your brain. In principle, you could have this experience without eyes, and you could even
have it as a disembodied brain in a vat. What makes you so sure you are
not in a vat right now, while you’re reading this book? How can you
prove that the book in your hand—or your hand itself, for that matter—
really exists? (In philosophy, we call this game epistemology—the theory
of knowledge. We have been playing it for centuries.)
Conscious experience, as such, is an internal aﬀair. Whatever else
may or may not be true about consciousness, once all the internal properties of your nervous system are set, all the properties of your conscious experience—its subjective content and the way it feels to
you—are fully determined. By “internal” I mean not only spatial but also
temporal internality—whatever is taking place right now, at this very
moment. As soon as certain properties of your brain are ﬁxed, everything you are experiencing at this very moment is also ﬁxed.
Philosophically, this does not yet mean that consciousness can be explained reductively. Indeed, it is not clear what counts as a whole experience: Are experiences discrete, countable entities? However, the ﬂow of
experience certainly exists, and cognitive neuroscience has shown that
the process of conscious experience is just an idiosyncratic path through
a physical reality so unimaginably complex and rich in information that it
will always be hard to grasp just how reduced our subjective experience

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

22

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 22

THE EGO TUNNEL

is. While we are drinking in all the colors, sounds, and smells—the diverse range of our emotions and sensory perceptions—it’s hard to believe that all of this is merely an internal shadow of something
inconceivably richer. But it is.
Shadows do not have an independent existence. And the book you
are holding right now—that is, the uniﬁed sensations of its color, weight,
and texture—is just a shadow, a low-dimensional projection of a higherdimensional object “out there.” It is an image, a representation that can
be described as a region in your neural state-space. This state-space itself may well have millions of dimensions; nevertheless, the physical reality you navigate with its help has an inconceivably higher number of
dimensions.
The shadow metaphor suggests Book VII of Plato’s Republic. In
Plato’s beautiful parable, the captives in the cave are chained down at
their thighs and necks. They can only look straight ahead; their heads
have been shackled in a ﬁxed position since birth. All they have ever
seen of themselves and of one another are the shadows cast on the opposite wall of the cave by the ﬁre burning behind them. They believe the
shadows to be real objects. The same is true of the shadows cast by the
objects carried along above the wall behind their heads. Might we be
like the captives, in that objects from some outside world cast shadows
on the wall in front of us? Might we be shadows ourselves? Indeed, the
philosophical version of our position on reality developed from Plato’s
myth—except that our version neither denies the reality of the material
world nor assumes the existence of eternal forms constituting the true
objects of those shadows on the wall of Plato’s cave. It does, however, assume that the images appearing in the Ego Tunnel are dynamic projections of something far greater and richer.
But what is the cave, and what are the shadows? Phenomenal shadows are low-dimensional projections within the central nervous system
of a biological organism. Let us assume that the book you are holding,
as consciously experienced by you at this very moment, is a dynamic,
low-dimensional shadow of the actual physical object in your actual
physical hands, a dancing shadow in your central nervous system. Then

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 23

The Appearance of a World

23

we can ask: What is the ﬁre that causes the projection of ﬂickering
shadows of consciousness, dancing as activation patterns on the walls
of your neural cave? The ﬁre is neural dynamics. The ﬁre is the incessant, self-regulating ﬂow of neural information-processing, constantly
perturbed and modulated by sensory input and cognition. The wall is not
a two-dimensional surface but the high-dimensional phenomenal statespace of human Technicolor phenomenology. Conscious experiences
are full-blown mental models in the representational space opened up
by the gigantic neural network in our heads—and because this space is
generated by a person possessing a memory and moving forward in
time, it is a tunnel. The pivotal question is this: If something like this is
taking place all the time, why don’t we ever become aware of it?
Antti Revonsuo alluded to the fascinating phenomenon of OBEs
when he compared conscious experience to a constant and eﬀortless
out-of-brain experience. As I have, he invokes the world-simulation
model to explain why the sense of presence you are enjoying right now
is only an inner, subjective kind of presence. The idea is that the content
of consciousness is the content of a simulated world in our brains, and
the sense of being there is itself a simulation. Our conscious experience
of the world is systematically externalized because the brain constantly
creates the experience that I am present in a world outside my brain.
Everything we know about the human brain today indicates that the experience of being outside the brain, and not in a tunnel, is brought about
by neural systems buried deep inside the brain. Of course, an external
world does exist, and knowledge and action do causally connect us to
it—but the conscious experience of knowing, acting, and being connected is an exclusively internal aﬀair.
Any convincing theory of consciousness will have to explain why this
does not seem so to us. Therefore, let us embark on a brief tour of the
Ego Tunnel, examining some of the most important problems for a
philosophically as well as neuroscientiﬁcally convincing theory of consciousness. We will discuss six of them in detail: the One-World Problem, or the unity of consciousness; the Now Problem, or the appearance
of a lived moment; the Reality Problem, or why you were born as a naive

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

24

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 24

THE EGO TUNNEL

realist; the Ineﬀability Problem, or what we will never be able to talk
about; the Evolution Problem, or the question of what consciousness
was good for; and ﬁnally, the Who Problem, or the issue of what is the
entity that has conscious experience. We are starting with the easiest
problem and ending with the hardest. After this, our groundwork will
be done.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 25

two


A TOUR OF THE TUNNEL

THE ONE-WORLD PROBLEM:
THE UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Once upon a time, I had to write an encyclopedia article on “Consciousness.” The ﬁrst thing I did was to photocopy all existing encyclopedia articles on the topic I could ﬁnd and track down the historical references. I
wanted to know whether in the long history of Western philosophy
there was a common philosophical insight running like a thread through
humanity’s perennial endeavor to understand the conscious mind. To
my surprise, I found two such essential insights.
The ﬁrst is that consciousness is a higher-order form of knowledge
accompanying thoughts and other mental states. The Latin concept of
conscientia is the original root from which all later terminologies in
English and the Romance languages developed. This in turn is derived
from cum (“with,” “together”) and scire (“to know”). In classical antiquity, as well as in the scholastic philosophy of the Christian Middle
Ages, conscientia typically referred either to moral conscience or to
knowledge shared by certain groups of people—again, most commonly
of moral ideas. Interestingly, being truly conscious was connected to
25

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

26

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 26

THE EGO TUNNEL

moral insight. (Isn’t it a beautiful notion that becoming conscious in the
true sense could be related to moral conscience? Philosophers would
have a new deﬁnition of the entity they call a zombie—an amoral person,
ethically fast asleep but with eyes wide open.)
In any case, many of the classical theories stated that becoming conscious had to do with installing an ideal observer in your mind, an inner
witness providing moral guidance as well as a hidden, entirely private
knowledge about the contents of your mental states. Consciousness
connected your thoughts with your actions by submitting them to the
moral judgment of the ideal observer. Whatever we may think about
these early theories of consciousness-as-conscience today, they certainly possessed philosophical depth and great beauty: Consciousness
was an inner space providing a point of contact between the real human
being and the ideal one inside, the only space in which you could be together with God even before death. From the time of René Descartes
(1596–1650), however, the philosophical interpretation of conscientia
simply as higher-order knowledge of mental states began to predominate. It has to do with certainty; in an important sense, consciousness is
knowing that you know while you know.
The second important insight seems to be the notion of integration:
Consciousness is what binds things together into a comprehensive, simultaneous whole. If we have this whole, then a world appears to us. If
the information ﬂow from your sensory organs is uniﬁed, you experience the world. If your senses come apart, you lose consciousness.
Philosophers like Immanuel Kant or Franz Brentano have theorized
about this “unity of consciousness”: What exactly is it that, at every single point in time, blends all the diﬀerent parts of your conscious experience into one single reality? Today it is interesting to note that the ﬁrst
essential insight—knowing that you know something—is mainly discussed in philosophy of mind, whereas the neuroscience of consciousness focuses on the problem of integration: how the features of objects
are bound together. The latter phenomenon—the One-World Problem
of dynamic, global integration—is what we must examine if we want to
understand the unity of consciousness. But in the process we may discover how both these essential questions—the top-down version dis-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 27

A Tour of the Tunnel

27

cussed in philosophy of mind and the bottom-up version discussed in
the neurosciences—are two sides of the same coin.
What would it be like to have the experience of living in many worlds
at the same time, of genuine parallel realities opening up in your mind?
Would there be parallel observers, too? The One-World Problem is so
simple that it is easily overlooked: In order for a world to appear to us, it
has to be one world ﬁrst. For most of us, it seems obvious that we live
our conscious lives in a single reality, and the world we wake up to every
morning is the same world we woke up to the day before. Our tunnel is
one tunnel; there are no back alleys, side streets, or alternative routes.
Only people who have suﬀered severe psychiatric disorders or have experimented with major doses of hallucinogens can perhaps conceive of
what it means to live in more than one tunnel at a time. The unity of
consciousness is one of the major achievements of the brain: It is the
not-so-simple phenomenological fact that all the contents of your current experience are seamlessly correlated, forming a coherent whole, the
world in which you live your life.
But the problem of integration has to be solved on several subglobal
levels ﬁrst. Imagine you are no longer able to bind the various features of
a seen object—its color, surface texture, edges, and so on—into a single
entity. In a disorder known as apperceptive agnosia, no coherent visual
model emerges on the level of conscious experience, despite the fact that
all the patient’s low-level visual processes are intact. Suﬀerers typically
have a fully intact visual ﬁeld that is consciously perceived, but they are
unable to recognize what it is they are looking at. They cannot distinguish shapes from or match shapes with each other, for example, or
copy drawings. Apperceptive agnosia is usually caused by a lack of oxygen supply to the brain—for instance, through carbon monoxide poisoning. Patients may well have a coherent, integrated visual world-model,
but certain types of visual information are no longer available to them to
act upon. On a functional level, they cannot use gestalt grouping cues or
ﬁgure/ground cues to organize their visual ﬁeld. Now imagine you are
no longer able to integrate your perception of an object with the categorical knowledge that would allow you to identify it, and you consequently cannot subjectively experience what it is you are perceiving—as

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

28

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 28

THE EGO TUNNEL

in asterognosia (the inability to recognize objects by touch, typically associated with lesions in two regions of the primary somatosensory cortex) or autotopagnosia (the inability to identify and name one’s own
body parts, also associated with cortical lesions). There are also patients
suﬀering from what has been called disjunctive agnosia, who cannot integrate seeing and hearing—whose conscious life seems to be taking
place in a movie with the wrong soundtrack. As one patient described
his experience, someone “was standing in front of me and I could see his
mouth moving, but I noticed that the mouth moving did not belong to
what I heard.”
Now, what if everything came apart? There are neurological patients
with wounded brains who describe “shattered worlds,” but in these cases
there is at least some kind of world left—something that could be experienced as having been shattered in the ﬁrst place. If the uniﬁed, multimodal scene—the Here and Now, the situation as such—dissolves
completely, we simply go blank. The world no longer appears to us.
A number of new ideas and hypotheses in the neurosciences suggest
how this “world-binding” function works. One such is the dynamical
core hypothesis, which posits that a highly integrated and internally differentiated neurodynamic pattern emerges from the constant background chatter of millions of neurons incessantly ﬁring away. Giulio
Tononi, a neuroscientist at the University of Wisconsin–Madison who is
a leading advocate of this hypothesis, speaks of a “functional cluster” of
neurons, whereas I have coined the concept of causal density.
The basic idea is simple: The global neural correlate of consciousness
is like an island emerging from the sea—as noted, it is a large set of neural properties underlying consciousness as a whole, underpinning your
experiential model of the world in its totality at any given moment. The
global NCC has many diﬀerent levels of description: Dynamically, we
can describe it as a coherent island, made of densely coupled relations of
cause and eﬀect, emerging from the waters of a much less coherent ﬂow
of neural activity. Or we could adopt a neurocomputational perspective
and look at the global NCC as something that results from informationprocessing in the brain and hence functions as a carrier of information.
At this point, it becomes something more abstract, which we might en-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 29

A Tour of the Tunnel

29

vision as an information cloud hovering above a neurobiological substrate. The “border” of this information cloud is functional, not physical;
the cloud is physically realized by widely distributed ﬁring neurons in
your head. Just like a real cloud, which is made of tiny water droplets
suspended in the air, the neuronal activation pattern underlying the totality of your conscious experience is made of millions of tiny electrical
discharges and chemical transitions at the synapses. In strict terms, it
has no ﬁxed location in the brain, though it is coherent.
But why is it coherent? What holds all the droplets—all the microevents—together? We do not yet know, but there are some indications
that the uniﬁed whole appears by virtue of the temporal ﬁne-structure
characterizing the conscious brain’s activity—that is, the rhythmic
dance of neuronal discharges and synchronous oscillations. This is why
the border of this whole is a functional border, outlining the island of
consciousness in an ocean made up of a myriad of less integrated and
less densely coupled neural micro-events. Whatever information is
within this cloud of ﬁring neurons is conscious information. Whatever is
within the cloud’s boundary (the “dynamical core”) is part of our inner
world; whatever is outside of it is not part of our subjective reality. Conscious experience can thus be seen as a special global property of the
overall neural dynamics of your brain, a special form of informationprocessing based on a globally integrated data format.
We also possess the ﬁrst mathematical instruments that allow us to
describe the causal complexity within the dynamical core of consciousness. Technical details aside, they show us how self-organization in our
brains strikes an optimal balance between integration and segregation,
creating the wonderful richness and diversity of conscious contents and
the unity of consciousness at the same time.
What does all this mean? What we want for consciousness is not a
uniform state of global synchrony, a state in which many nerve cells
simply ﬁre together simultaneously. We ﬁnd such uniformity in states
of unconsciousness such as deep sleep and during epileptic seizures; in
these cases, the synchrony wipes out all the internal complexity: It is as
if the synchrony had glossed over all the colors and shapes, the objects
making up our world. We want large-scale coherence spanning many

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

30

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 30

THE EGO TUNNEL

areas of the brain and ﬂexibly binding many diﬀerent contents into a
conscious hierarchy: the letters into the page, the page into the book,
the hand holding the book into your bodily self, and the self sitting in a
chair in the room and understanding the words. We want a unity of consciousness that—internally—is as diﬀerentiated as possible. On the
other hand, maximal diﬀerentiation is not optimal, either, because then
our world would fall apart into unconnected pieces of mental content
and we would lose consciousness. The trick with consciousness is to
achieve just the right trade-oﬀ between the parts and the whole—and at
any single moment a widely distributed network of neurons in the brain
seems to achieve just that, as a cloud of single nerve cells, dispersed in
space, ﬁre away in intricate patterns of synchronous activity, perhaps
with one pattern becoming embedded in the next. Just like the water
droplets that form a real cloud, some elements leave the aggregate at any
given moment, while others join it. Consciousness is a large-scale, uniﬁed phenomenon emerging from a myriad of physical micro-events. As
long as a suﬃciently high degree of internal correlation and causal coupling allows this island of dancing micro-events in your brain to emerge,
you live in a single reality. A single, uniﬁed world appears to you.
This emergence can happen during “oﬄine states” as well: In dreams,
however, the binding of contents does not work quite as well, which is
why your dream reality is frequently so bizarre, why you have diﬃculty
focusing your attention, why scenes follow each other so quickly. Nevertheless, there is still an overall situation, you are still present, and that is
why phenomenal experience continues. But when you move into deep
sleep and the island dissolves back into the sea, your world disappears as
well. We humans have known this since Greek antiquity: Sleep is the little brother of death; it means letting go of the world.
One of the intriguing characteristics of current research into consciousness is how old philosophical ideas reappear in the best of cutting-edge neuroscience—in new disguise, as it were. Aristotle and Franz
Brentano alike pointed out that consciously perceiving must also mean
being aware of the fact that one is consciously perceiving, right now, at
this very moment. In a certain sense, we must perceive the perceiving
while it happens. If this idea is true, the brain state creating your con-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 31

A Tour of the Tunnel

31

scious perception of the book in your hand right now must have two
logical parts: one portraying the book and one continuously representing the state itself. One part points at the world, and one at itself. Conscious states could be exactly those states that “metarepresent”
themselves while representing something else. This classical idea has
logical problems, but the insight itself can perhaps be preserved in an
empirically plausible framework.
Work being done by Dutch neuroscientist Victor Lamme in Amsterdam and in Stanislas Dehaene’s lab at the NeuroSpin Center in the CEA
campus of Saclay and at the Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital in Paris converges
on the central importance of so-called recurrent connections as a functional basis for consciousness. In conscious visual processing, for example, high-level information is dynamically mapped back to low-level
information, but it all refers to the same retinal image. Each time your
eyes land on a scene (remember, your eye makes about three saccades
per second), there is a feedforward-feedback cycle about the current image, and that cycle gives you the detailed conscious percept of that
scene. You continuously make conscious snapshots of the world via
these feedforward-feedback cycles. In a more general sense, the principle is that the almost continuous feedback-loops from higher to lower
areas create an ongoing cycle, a circular nested ﬂow of information, in
which what happened a few milliseconds ago is dynamically mapped
back to what is coming in right now. In this way, the immediate past
continuously creates a context for the present—it ﬁlters what can be experienced right now. We see how an old philosophical idea is reﬁned
and spelled out by modern neuroscience on the nuts-and-bolts level. A
standing context-loop is created. And this may be a deeper insight into
the essence of the world-creating function of conscious experience:
Conscious information seems to be integrated and uniﬁed precisely because the underlying physical process is mapped back onto itself and
becomes its own context. If we apply this idea not to single representations, such as the visual experience of an apple in your hand, but to the
brain’s uniﬁed portrait of the world as a whole, then the dynamic ﬂow of
conscious experience appears as the result of a continuous large-scale
application of the brain’s prior knowledge to the current situation. If you

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

32

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 32

THE EGO TUNNEL

are conscious, the overall process of perceiving, learning, and living creates a context for itself—and that is how your reality turns into a lived
reality.
Another fascinating scientiﬁc route into the One-World Problem is
increasingly receiving attention. It has long been known that in deep
meditation the experience of unity and holistic integration is particularly salient. Thus, if we want to know what consciousness is, why not
consult those people who cultivate it in its purest form? Or even better,
why not use our modern neuroimaging techniques to look directly into
their brains while they maximize the unity and holism of their minds?
Antoine Lutz and his colleagues at the W. M. Keck Laboratory for
Functional Brain Imaging and Behavior at the University of Wisconsin
studied Tibetan monks who had experienced at least ten thousand
hours of meditation. They found that meditators self-induce sustained
high-amplitude gamma-band oscillations and global phase-synchrony,
visible in EEG recordings made while they are meditating. The highamplitude gamma activity found in some of these meditators seems to
be the strongest reported in the scientiﬁc literature. Why is this interesting? As Wolf Singer and his coworkers have shown, gamma-band oscillations, caused by groups of neurons ﬁring away in synchrony about
forty times per second, are one of our best current candidates for creating unity and wholeness (although their speciﬁc role in this respect is
still very much debated). For example, on the level of conscious objectperception, these synchronous oscillations often seem to be what makes
an object’s various features—the edges, color, and surface texture of, say,
an apple—cohere as a single uniﬁed percept. Many experiments have
shown that synchronous ﬁring may be exactly what diﬀerentiates an assembly of neurons that gains access to consciousness from one that also
ﬁres away but in an uncoordinated manner and thus does not. Synchrony is a powerful causal force: If a thousand soldiers walk over a
bridge together, nothing happens; however, if they march across in lockstep, the bridge may well collapse.
The synchrony of neural responses also plays a decisive role in ﬁgurebackground segregation—that is, the pop-out eﬀect that lets us perceive
an object against a background, allowing a new gestalt to emerge from

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 33

A Tour of the Tunnel

33

the perceptual scene. Ulrich Ott is Germany’s leading meditation researcher, working at the Bender Institute of Neuroimaging at the JustusLiebig-Universität in Giessen. He confronted me with an intriguing
idea: Could deep meditation be the process, perhaps the only process, in
which human beings can sometimes turn the global background into the
gestalt, the dominating feature of consciousness itself? This assumption
would ﬁt in nicely with an intuition held by many, among others Antoine Lutz, namely that the fundamental subject/object structure of experience can be transcended in states of this kind.
Interestingly, this high-amplitude oscillatory activity in the brains of
experienced meditators emerges over several dozens of seconds. They
can’t just switch it on; instead, it begins to unfold only when the meditator manages eﬀortlessly to “step out of the way.” The full-blown meditative state emerges only slowly, but this is exactly what the theory
predicts: As a gigantic network phenomenon, the level of neural synchronization underlying the unity of consciousness will require more
time to develop, because the amount of time required to achieve synchronization is proportional to the size of the neural assembly—in meditation, an orchestrated group of many hundreds of million nerve cells
must be formed. The oscillations also correlate with the meditators’ verbal reports of the intensity of the meditative experience—that is, oscillations are directly related to reports of intensity. Another interesting
ﬁnding is that there are signiﬁcant postmeditative changes to the baseline activity of the brain. Apparently, repeated meditative practice
changes the deep structure of consciousness. If meditation is seen as a
form of mental training, it turns out that oscillatory synchrony in the
gamma range opens just the right time window that would be necessary
to promote synaptic change eﬃciently.
To sum up, it would seem that feature binding occurs when the widely
distributed neurons that represent the reﬂection of light, the surface
properties, and the weight of, say, this book start dancing together, ﬁring
at the same time. This rhythmic ﬁring pattern creates a coherent cloud in
your brain, a network of neurons representing a single object—the
book—for you at a particular moment. Holding it all together is coherence in time. Binding is achieved in the temporal dimension. The unity of

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

34

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 34

THE EGO TUNNEL

consciousness is thus seen to be a dynamic property of the human brain.
It spans many levels of organization, it self-organizes over time, and it
constantly seeks an optimal balance between the parts and the whole as
they gradually unfold. It shows up on the EEG as a slowly evolving global
property, and, as demonstrated by our meditators, it can be cultivated
and explored from the inside, from the ﬁrst-person perspective. Please
also see the interview with Wolf Singer at the end of this chapter.
But the next problem in formulating a complete theory of consciousness is more diﬃcult.

THE NOW PROBLEM: A LIVED MOMENT EMERGES
Here is something that, as a philosopher, I have always found both fascinating and deeply puzzling: A complete scientiﬁc description of the
physical universe would not contain the information as to what time is
“now.” Indeed, such a description would be free of what philosophers
call “indexical terms.” There would be no pointers or little red arrows to
tell you “You are here!” or “Right now!” In real life, this is the job of the
conscious brain: It constantly tells the organism harboring it what place
is here and what time is now. This experiential Now is the second big
problem for a modern theory of consciousness.
The biological consciousness tunnel is not a tunnel only in the simple
sense of being an internal model of reality in your brain. It is also a time
tunnel—or, more precisely, a tunnel of presence. Here we encounter a
subtler form of inwardness—namely, an inwardness in the temporal domain, subjectively experienced.
The empirical story will have to deal with short-term memory and
working memory, with recurrent loops in neural networks, and with the
binding of single events into larger temporal gestalts (often simply
called the psychological moment). The truly vexing aspect of the Now
Problem is conceptual: It is very hard to say what exactly the puzzle consists of. At this point, philosophers and scientists alike typically quote a
passage from the fourteenth chapter of the eleventh book of St. Augustine’s Confessions. Here the Bishop of Hippo famously notes, “What
then is time? If no one asks me, I know. If I wish to explain it to one that

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 35

A Tour of the Tunnel

35

asketh, I know not.” The primary diﬃculty with the Now Problem is not
the neuroscience but how to state it properly. Let me try: Consciousness
is inwardness in time. It makes the world present for you by creating a
new space in your mind—the space of temporal internality. Everything
is in the Now. Whatever you experience, you experience it as happening
at this moment.
You may disagree at ﬁrst: Is it not true that my conscious, episodic
memory of my last walk on the beach refers to something in the past?
And is it not true that my conscious thoughts and plans about next
weekend’s trip to the mountains refer to the future? Yes, this is true—
but they are always embedded in a conscious model of the self as remembering the starﬁsh on the beach right now, as planning a new route
to the peak at this very moment.
A major function of conscious experience consists, as the great
British psychologist Richard Gregory has put it, in “ﬂagging the dangerous present.” One essential function of consciousness is to help an
organism stay in touch with the immediate present—with all those
properties in both itself and the environment that may change fast and
unpredictably. This idea relates to a classic concept introduced by
Bernard Baars of the Neurosciences Institute in San Diego, best known
for his book A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness, in which he outlines
his global-workspace theory as a model for consciousness. His fruitful
metaphor of consciousness as the content of a global workspace of the
mind implies that only the critical aspects are represented in consciousness. Conscious information is exactly that information that
must be made available for every single one of your cognitive capacities
at the same time. You require a conscious representation only if you do
not know exactly what will happen next and which capacities (attention, cognition, memory, motor control) you will need to react properly
to the challenge around the corner. This critical information must remain active so that diﬀerent modules or brain mechanisms can access
it simultaneously.
My idea is that this simultaneity is precisely why we need the conscious Now. In order to eﬀect this, our brains learned to simulate temporal internality. In order to create a common platform—a blackboard

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

36

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 36

THE EGO TUNNEL

on which messages to our various specialized brain areas can be
posted—we need a common frame of reference, and this frame of reference is a temporal one. Although, strictly speaking, no such thing as
Now exists in the outside world, it proved adaptive to organize the inner
model of the world around such a Now—creating a common temporal
frame of reference for all the mechanisms in the brain so that they can
access the same information at the same time. A certain point in time
had to be represented in a privileged manner in order to be ﬂagged as
reality. The past is outside-time, as is the future. But there is also insidetime, this time, the Now, the moment you’re currently living. All your
conscious thoughts and feelings take place in this lived moment.
How are we going to ﬁnd this special form of inwardness in the biological brain? Of course, conscious time experience has other elements.
We experience simultaneity. (And have you ever noticed that you cannot will two diﬀerent actions at the same moment or simultaneously
make two decisions?) We experience succession: of the notes in a piece
of music, of two thoughts drifting by in our minds, one after the other.
We experience duration: A musical tone or an emotion may stay constant over time. From all this emerges what the neuroscientist Ernst
Pöppel, one of the pioneer researchers in this ﬁeld, and his colleague Eva
Ruhnau, director of the University of Munich’s Human Science Center,
describe as a temporal gestalt: Musical notes can form a motif—a
bound pattern of sounds constituting a whole that you recognize as such
from one instant to the next. Similarly, individual thoughts can form
more complex conscious experiences, which may be described as unfolding patterns of reasoning.
By the way, there is an upper limit to what you can consciously experience as taking place in a single moment: It is almost impossible to experience a musical motif, a rhythmic piece of poetry, or a complex
thought that lasts for more than three seconds as a uniﬁed temporal
gestalt. When I was studying philosophy in Frankfurt, professors typically did not extemporize during their lectures; instead, they read from a
manuscript for ninety minutes, ﬁring rounds of excessively long, nested
sentences, one after another, at their students. I suspected that these
lectures were not aimed at successful communication at all (although

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 37

A Tour of the Tunnel

37

they were frequently about it) but that this was a kind of intellectual
machismo. (“I am going to demonstrate the inferiority of your intelligence to you by spouting fantastically complex and seemingly endless
sentences. They will make your short-term buﬀer collapse, because you
cannot integrate them into a single temporal gestalt anymore. You won’t
understand a thing, and you will have to admit that your tunnel is
smaller than mine!”)
I assume many of my readers have encountered this type of behavior
themselves. It is a psychological strategy we inherited from our primate
ancestors, a slightly more subtle form of ostentatious display behavior
that made its way into academia. What enables this new kind of
machismo is the limited capacity of the moving window of the Now.
Looking through this window, we see enduring objects and meaningful
chains of events. Underlying all these experiences of duration, succession, and the formation of temporal wholes is the rock-solid bed of presence. In order to understand what the appearance of a world is, we
urgently need a theory of how the human brain generates this temporal
sense of presence.
Presence is a necessary condition for conscious experience. If the
brain could solve the One-World Problem but not the Now Problem, a
world could not appear to you. In a deep sense, appearance is simply
presence, and the subjective sense of temporal immediacy is the deﬁnition of an internal space of time.
Is it possible to transcend this subjective Now-ness, to escape the
tunnel of presence? Imagine you are lost in a daydream. Completely.
Your conscious mind is not “ﬂagging the dangerous present” anymore.
Those animals in the history of our planet that did this too often did not
stand a chance of becoming our ancestors; they were eaten by other, less
pensive animals. But what actually happens at the moment you fully lose
contact with your present surroundings, say, in a manifest daydream?
You are suddenly somewhere else. Another lived Now emerges in your
mind. Now-ness is an essential feature of consciousness.
And, of course, it is an illusion. As modern-day neuroscience tells
us, we are never in touch with the present, because neural informationprocessing itself takes time. Signals take time to travel from your sensory

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

38

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 38

THE EGO TUNNEL

organs along the multiple neuronal pathways in your body to your brain,
and they take time to be processed and transformed into objects,
scenes, and complex situations. So, strictly speaking, what you are experiencing as the present moment is actually the past.
At this point, it becomes clear why philosophers speak about “phenomenal” consciousness or “phenomenal” experience. A phenomenon
is an appearance. The phenomenal Now is the appearance of a Now. Nature optimized our time experience over the last couple of millions of
years so that we experience something as taking place now because this
arrangement is functionally adequate in organizing our behavioral
space. But from a more rigorous, philosophical point of view, the temporal inwardness of the conscious Now is an illusion. There is no immediate contact with reality.
This point gives us a second fundamental insight into the tunnel-like
nature of consciousness: The sense of presence is an internal phenomenon, created by the human brain. Not only are there no colors out there,
but there is also no present moment. Physical time ﬂows continuously.
The physical universe does not know what William James called the
“specious present,” nor does it know an expanded, or “smeared,” present
moment. The brain is an exception: For certain physical organisms, such
as us, it has proved viable to represent the path through reality as if
there were an extended present, a chain of individual moments through
which we live our lives. I like James’s metaphor, according to which the
present is not a knife-edge but a saddleback with a breadth of its own,
on which we sit perched and from which we look in two directions into
time. Of course, from the illusory smearing of the present moment in
human consciousness it does not follow that some kind of nonsmeared
present could not exist on the level of physics—but remember, a complete physical description of the universe would not contain the word
“now”; there would be no little red arrow telling us “This is your place in
the temporal order.” The Ego Tunnel is just the opposite of a God’s-eye
view of the world. It has a Now, a Here—and a Me, being there now.
The lived Now has a fascinating double aspect. From an epistemological point of view, it is an illusion (the present is an appearance). The
moving window of the conscious Now, though, has proved functionally

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 39

A Tour of the Tunnel

39

advantageous for creatures like us: It successfully bundles perception,
cognition, and conscious will in a way that selects just the right parameters of interaction with the physical world, in environments like those in
which our ancestors fought for survival. In this sense, it is a form of
knowledge: functional, nonconceptual knowledge about what will work
with this kind of body and these kinds of eyes, ears, and limbs.
What we experience as the present moment embodies implicit
knowledge about how we can integrate our sensory perceptions with
our motor behavior in a ﬂuid and adaptive manner. However, this type
of knowledge applies only to the kind of environment we found on the
surface of this planet. Other conscious beings, in other parts of the universe, might have evolved completely diﬀerent forms of time experience.
They might be frozen into an eternal Now or have a fantastically high
resolution, living for only a few of our Earth minutes and experiencing
more intense individual moments than a million human beings experience in a lifetime. They could be masters of boredom, subjects of an extremely slow passage of time. A good (and more diﬃcult) question is
how much room for variation there is in terms of subjective time experience. If my argument is sound, conscious minds can be situated only in
one single, real Now at a time—because this is one of the essential features of consciousness. Is it logically possible to live in two or more absolutely equivalent Nows at the same time, to have a subjective
perspective originating from multiple points in the temporal order? I
don’t think so, because there would no longer be one single, present
“self ” who had these experiences. Moreover, it’s hard to imagine a situation in which experiencing multiple lived presents might have been
adaptive. Thus, although no such thing as an extended present exists
from a strict philosophical point of view or from the perspective of a
physicist, there must be deep biological truths and a profound evolutionary wisdom behind the way conscious beings such as ourselves happen to represent time in the brain.
Even given a radically materialist view of mind and consciousness,
one must concede that there is a complex physical property that (as far as
we know) exists only in biological nervous systems on this planet. This
new property is a virtual window of presence, and it is implemented in

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

40

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 40

THE EGO TUNNEL

the brains of vertebrates and particularly of higher mammals. It is the
lived Now. The physical passage of time existed before this property
emerged, but then something new was added—a representation of time,
including an illusory, smeared present, plus the fact that the beings harboring this new property in their brains could not recognize it as a representation. Billions of conscious, time-representing nervous systems
created billions of individual perspectives.
At this point, we also touch on a deeper and more general principle
running through modern research on consciousness. The more aspects
of subjective experience we can explain in a hardheaded, materialistic
manner, the more our view of what the self-organizing physical universe
itself is will change. Very obviously, and in a strictly no-nonsense, nonmetaphorical, and nonmysterious way, the physical universe itself possesses an intrinsic potential for the emergence of subjectivity. Crude
versions of objectivism are false, and reality is much richer than we
thought.

THE REA LITY PROBLEM:
HOW YOU WERE BORN A S A NA IVE REA LIST
Minimal consciousness is the appearance of a world. However, if we
solve the One-World Problem and the Now Problem, all we have is a
model of a uniﬁed world and a model of the present moment in the
brain. We have a representation of a single world and a representation of
a single moment. Clearly, the appearance of a world is something diﬀerent. Imagine you could suddenly apprehend the whole world, your own
body, the book in your hands, and all of your current surroundings as a
“mental model.” Would this still be conscious experience?
Now, try to imagine something even more diﬃcult: The robust sense
of presence you are enjoying right now is itself only a special kind of image. It is a time representation in your brain—a ﬁction, not the real
thing. What would happen if you could distance yourself from the current moment—if the Now-ness of this current moment turned out not
to be the real Now but only an elegant portrait of presence in your
mind? Would you still be conscious? This is not simply an empirical is-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 41

A Tour of the Tunnel

41

sue; it also possesses a distinct philosophical ﬂavor. The pivotal question
is how to get from a world-model and a Now-model to exactly what you
have as you are reading this: the presence of a world.
The answer lies in the transparency of phenomenal representations.
Recall that a representation is transparent if the system using it cannot
recognize it as a representation. A world-model active in the brain is
transparent if the brain has no chance of discovering that it is a model. A
model of the current moment is transparent if the brain has no chance of
discovering that it is simply the result of information-processing currently going on in itself. Imagine you are watching a movie on TV—2001:
A Space Odyssey, say, and you have just watched the scene in which the
victorious apeman throws his bone-weapon high into the air, at which
point the ﬁlm jumps into the future, matching the image of the tumbling
bone to that of a spacecraft. Dr. Heywood R. Floyd reaches Moon Base
Clavius in his lunar landing craft, and discusses with the local Soviet scientists “the potential for culture shock and social disorientation” presented by the discovery of a monolith on the moon. When they arrive at
the gigantic black monolith, a member of the exploring party reaches out
and strokes its smooth surface, mirroring the awe and curiosity the apemen exhibited millions of years earlier. The scientists and astronauts
gather around it for a group photo, but suddenly an earsplitting highpitched tone is picked up by their earphones—a tone emitted by the
monolith as the sun shines down on it. You are completely engaged in the
scene unfolding in front of you, to the point of identifying with the bewildered spacesuited humans. However, you can distance yourself from the
movie at any time and become aware that there is a separate you sitting
on the couch in the living room and only watching all this. You can also
move up close to the screen and inspect the little pixels, thousands of little squares of light rapidly blinking on and oﬀ, creating a continuous
ﬂowing image as soon as you are a couple of yards away. Not only is this
ﬂowing image made up of individual pixels, but the temporal dynamic is
not really continuous at all—the individual pixels blink on and oﬀ according to a certain rhythm, changing their color in abrupt steps.
You cannot do this distancing with your consciousness. It is a diﬀerent kind of medium. If you look at the book in your hands and try to

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

42

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 42

THE EGO TUNNEL

apprehend individual pixels, you can’t see any. The appearance of the
book is dense and impenetrable. Visual attention cannot dissolve the ﬂuidity, the continuity, of your book experience as it can discover the individual pixels when you take a closer look at the TV screen. The blinding
speed with which your brain activates the visual model of the book and
integrates it with the tactile sensations in your ﬁngers is simply too fast.
One might argue that this disparity exists because the system creating the “pixels” is also the one trying to detect them. Of course, in the
continuous ﬂow of information-processing in the brain, nothing like
pixels really exists. Still, could your inability to break the book percept
down into pixels be caused by something other than the speed of integration in the brain? If your brain worked much more slowly (say, if it
could detect time spans of a year but no briefer), you still wouldn’t be
able to detect those “pixels.” You would still perceive a seamless passage
of time, because the conscious working of our brain is not a single uniform event but a multilayered chain of events in which diﬀerent
processes are densely coupled and interacting all the time. The brain
creates what are called higher-order representations. If you attend to
your perception of a visual object (such as this book), then there is at
least one second-order process (i.e., attentional processing) taking a
ﬁrst-order process—in this case, visual perception—as its object. If the
ﬁrst-order process—the process creating the seen object, the book in
your hands—integrates its information in a smaller time-window than
the second-order process (namely, the attention you’re directing at this
new inner model), then the integration process on the ﬁrst-order level
will itself become transparent, in the sense that you cannot consciously
experience it. By necessity, you are now blind to the fundamental construction process. Transparency is not so much a question of the speed
of information-processing as of the speed of diﬀerent types of processing (such as attention and visual perception) relative to each other.
Just as swiftly and eﬀortlessly, the book-model is bound with other
models, such as the models of your hands and of the desk, and seamlessly
integrated into your overall conscious space of experience. Because it has
been optimized over millions of years, this mechanism is so fast and so
reliable that you never notice its existence. It makes your brain invisible

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 43

A Tour of the Tunnel

43

to itself. You are in contact only with its content; you never see the representation as such; therefore, you have the illusion of being directly in
contact with the world. And that is how you become a naïve realist, a
person who thinks she is in touch with an observer-independent reality.
If you talk to neuroscientists as a philosopher, you will be introduced
to new concepts and ﬁnd some of them extremely useful. One I found
particularly helpful was the notion of metabolic price. If a biological
brain wants to develop a new cognitive capacity, it must pay a price. The
currency in which the price is paid is sugar. Additional energy must be
made available and more glucose must be burned to develop and stabilize this new capacity. As in nature in general, there is no such thing as a
free lunch. If an animal is to evolve, say, color vision, this new trait must
pay by making new sources of food and sugar available to it. If a biological organism wants to develop a conscious self or think in concepts or
master a language, then this step into a new level of mental complexity
must be sustainable. It requires additional neural hardware, and that
hardware requires fuel. That fuel is sugar, and the new trait must enable
our animal to ﬁnd this extra amount of energy in its environment.
Likewise, any good theory of consciousness must reveal how it paid
for itself. (In principle, consciousness could be a by-product of other
traits that paid for themselves, but the fact that it has remained stable
over time suggests that it was adaptive.) A convincing theory must explain how having a world appear to you enabled you to extract more energy from your environment than a zombie could. This evolutionary
perspective also helps solve the puzzle of naive realism.
Our ancestors did not need to know that a bear-representation was
currently active in their brains or that they were currently attending to an
internal state representing a slowly approaching wolf. Thus neither image required them to burn precious sugar. All they needed to know was
“Bear over there!” or “Wolf approaching from the left!” Knowing that all
of this was just a model of the world and of the Now was not necessary
for survival. This additional kind of knowledge would have required the
formation of what philosophers call metarepresentations, or images
about other images, thoughts about thoughts. It would have required
additional hardware in the brain and more fuel. Evolution sometimes

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

44

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 44

THE EGO TUNNEL

produces superﬂuous new traits by chance, but these luxurious properties are rarely sustained over long periods of time. Thus, the answer to
the question of why our conscious representations of the world are
transparent—why we are constitutionally unable to recognize them as
representations—and why this proved a viable, stable, strategy for survival and procreation probably is that the formation of metarepresentations would not have been cost-eﬃcient: It would have been too
expensive in terms of the additional sugar we would have had to ﬁnd in
our environment.
A smaller time scale gives another way of understanding why we were
all born as naive realists. Why are we unaware of the tunnel-like nature of
consciousness? As noted, the robust illusion of being directly in touch
with the outside world has to do with the speed of neural informationprocessing in our brains. Further, subjective experience is not generated
by one process alone but by various interacting functions: multisensory
integration, short-term memory, attention, and so on. My theory says
that, in essence, consciousness is the space of attentional agency: Conscious information is exactly that set of information currently active in
our brains to which we can deliberately direct our high-level attention.
Low-level attention is automatic and can be triggered by entirely unconscious events. For a perception to be conscious does not mean you deliberately access it with the help of your attentional mechanisms. On the
contrary: Most things we’re aware of are on the fringe of our consciousness and not in its focus. But whatever is available for deliberately directed attention is what is consciously experienced. Nevertheless, if we
carefully direct our visual attention at an object, we are constitutionally
unable to apprehend the earlier processing stages. “Taking a closer look”
doesn’t help: We are unable to attend to the construction process that
generates the model of the book in our brains. As a matter of fact, attention often seems to do exactly the opposite: by stabilizing the sensory
object, we make it even more real.
That is why the walls of the tunnel are impenetrable for us: Even if
we believe that something is just an internal construct, we can experience it only as given and never as constructed. This fact may well be
cognitively available to us (because we may have a correct theory or

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 45

A Tour of the Tunnel

45

concept of it), but it is not attentionally or introspectively available,
simply because on the level of subjective experience, we have no point
of reference “outside” the tunnel. Whatever appears to us—however it
is mediated—appears as reality.
Please try for a moment to inspect closely the holistic experience of
seeing and simultaneously touching the book in your hands and of feeling its weight. Try hard to become aware of the construction process in
your brain. You will ﬁnd two things: First, you cannot do it. Second, the
surface of the tunnel is not two-dimensional: It possesses considerable
depth and is composed of very diﬀerent sensory qualities—touch,
sound, even smell. In short, the tunnel has a high-dimensional, multimodal surface. All this contributes to the fact that you cannot recognize
the walls of the tunnel as an inner surface; this simply does not resemble
any tunnel experience you’ve ever had.
Why are the walls of the neurophenomenological cave so impenetrable? An answer is that in order to be useful (like the desktop on the
graphical user-interface of your personal computer), the inside surface of
the cave must be closed and fully realistic. It acts as a dynamic ﬁlter.
Imagine you could introspectively become aware of ever deeper and earlier phases of your information-processing while looking at the book in
your hands. What would happen? The representation would no longer
be transparent, but it would still remain inside the tunnel. A ﬂood of interacting patterns would suddenly rush at you; alternative interpretations
and intensely competing associations would invade your reality. You
would lose yourself in the myriad of micro-events taking place in your
brain at every millisecond—you would get lost inside yourself. Your mind
would explode into endless loops of self-exploration. Maybe this is what
Aldous Huxley meant when, in his 1954 classic, The Doors of Perception,
he quoted William Blake: “If the doors of perception were cleansed,
everything would appear to man as it is, inﬁnite. For man has closed
himself up, till he sees all things through narrow chinks of his cavern.”
The dynamic ﬁlter of phenomenal transparency is one of nature’s
most intriguing inventions, and it has had far-reaching consequences.
Our inner images of the world around us are quite reliable. In order to
be good representations, our conscious models of bears, of wolves, of

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

46

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 46

THE EGO TUNNEL

books in our hands, of smiles on our friends’ faces, must serve as a window on the world. This window must be clean and crystal clear. That is
what phenomenal transparency is: It contributes to the eﬀortlessness
and seamlessness that are the hallmark of reliable conscious perceptions
that portray the world around us in a suﬃciently accurate manner. We
don’t have to know or care about how this series of little miracles keeps
unfolding in our brains; we can simply enjoy conscious experience as an
invisible interface to reality. As long as nothing goes wrong, naive realism makes for a very relaxed way of living.
However, questions arise. Are there people who aren’t naive realists,
or special situations in which naive realism disappears? My theory—the
self-model theory of subjectivity—predicts that as soon as a conscious
representation becomes opaque (that is, as soon as we experience it as
a representation), we lose naive realism. Consciousness without naive
realism does exist. This happens whenever, with the help of other, second-order representations, we become aware of the construction
process—of all the ambiguities and dynamical stages preceding the
stable state that emerges at the end. When the window is dirty or
cracked, we immediately realize that conscious perception is only an interface, and we become aware of the medium itself. We doubt that our
sensory organs are working properly. We doubt the existence of whatever it is we are seeing or feeling, and we realize that the medium itself is
fallible. In short, if the book in your hands lost its transparency, you
would experience it as a state of your mind rather than as an element of
the outside world. You would immediately doubt its independent existence. It would be more like a book-thought than a book-perception.
Precisely this happens in various situations—for example, in visual
hallucinations during which the patient is aware of hallucinating, or in
ordinary optical illusions when we suddenly become aware that we are
not in immediate contact with reality. Normally, such experiences make
us think something is wrong with our eyes. If you could consciously experience earlier processing stages of the representation of the book in
your hands, the image would probably become unstable and ambiguous;
it would start to breathe and move slightly. Its surface would become iridescent, shining in diﬀerent colors at the same time. Immediately you

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 47

A Tour of the Tunnel

47

would ask yourself whether this could be a dream, whether there was
something wrong with your eyes, whether someone had mixed a potent
hallucinogen into your drink. A segment of the wall of the Ego Tunnel
would have lost its transparency, and the self-constructed nature of the
overall ﬂow of experience would dawn on you. In a nonconceptual and
entirely nontheoretical way, you would suddenly gain a deeper understanding of the fact that this world, at this very moment, only appears to
you.
What if you were born with an awareness of your internal processing? Obviously you would still not be in contact with reality as such, because you would still only know it under a representation. But you
would also continuously represent yourself as representing. As in a
dream in which you have become aware that you’re dreaming, your
world would no longer be experienced as a reality but as a form of mental content. It would all be one big thought in your mind, the mind of an
ideal observer.
We have arrived at a minimalist concept of consciousness. We have
an answer to the question of how the brain moves from an internal
world-model and an internal Now-model to the full-blown appearance
of a world. The answer is this: If the system in which these models are
constructed is constitutionally unable to recognize both the worldmodel and the current psychological moment, the experience of the
present, as a model, as only an internal construction, then the system
will of necessity generate a reality tunnel. It will have the experience of
being in immediate contact with a single, uniﬁed world in a single Now.
For any such system, a world appears. This is equivalent to the minimal
notion of consciousness we took as our starting point.
If we can solve the One-World Problem, the Now Problem, and the
Reality Problem, we can also ﬁnd the global neural correlate of consciousness in the human brain. Recall that there is a speciﬁc NCC for
forms of conscious content (one for the redness of the rose, another for
the rose as a whole, and so on) as well as a global NCC, which is a much
larger set of neural properties underlying consciousness as a whole, or
all currently active forms of conscious content, underpinning your experiential model of the world in its totality at a given moment. Solving the

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

48

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 48

THE EGO TUNNEL

One-World Problem, the Now Problem, and the Reality Problem involves three steps: First, ﬁnding a suitable phenomenological description of what it’s like to have all these experiences; second, analyzing
their contents in more detail (the representational level); and third, describing the functions bringing about these contents. Discovering the
global NCC means discovering how these functions are implemented in
the nervous system. This would also allow us to decide which other beings on this planet enjoy the appearance of a world; these beings will
have a recognizable physical counterpart in their brains.
On the most simple and fundamental level, the global NCC will be a
dynamic brain state exhibiting large-scale coherence. It will be fully integrated with whatever generates the virtual window of presence, because in a sense it is this window. Finally, it will have to make earlier
processing stages unavailable to high-level attention. I predict that by
2050 we will have found the GNCC, the global neural correlate of consciousness. But I also predict that in the process we will discover a series
of technical problems that may not be so easy to solve.

THE INEFFA BILITY PROBLEM:
WHAT WE WILL NEVER BE A BLE TO TA LK A BOUT
Imagine I’m holding color swatches of two similar shades of green up in
front of you. There’s a diﬀerence between the two shades, but it’s barely
noticeable. (The technical term sometimes used by experts in psychophysics is JND, or “just noticeable diﬀerence.” The JND is a statistical
distinction, not an exact quantity.) The two shades (I’ll call them Green
No. 24 and Green No. 25) are the nearest possible neighbors on the
color chart; there’s no shade of green between them that you could discriminate. Now I put my hands behind my back, mix the swatches, and
hold one up. Is it Green No. 24 or Green No. 25? The interesting discovery is that conscious perception alone does not enable you to tell the difference. This means that understanding consciousness may also involve
understanding the subtle and the ultraﬁne, not just the whole.
We now must move from the global to the more subtle aspects of
consciousness. If it is really true that some aspects of the contents of

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 49

A Tour of the Tunnel

49

consciousness are ineﬀable—and many philosophers, including me, believe this to be the case—how are we going to do solid scientiﬁc research
on them? How can we reductively explain something we cannot even
talk about properly?
The contents of consciousness can be ineﬀable in many diﬀerent
ways. You cannot explain to a blind man the redness of a rose. If the linguistic community you live in does not have a concept for a particular
feeling, you may not be able to discover it in yourself or name it so as to
share it with others. A third type of ineﬀability is formed by all those
conscious states (“conscious” because they could in principle be attended to) so ﬂeeting you cannot form a memory trace of them: brief
ﬂickers on the fringe of your subjective awareness—perhaps a hardly detectable color change or a mild ﬂuctuation in some emotion, or a barely
noticeable glimmer in the mélange of your bodily sensations. There
might even be longer episodes of conscious experience—during the
dream state, say, or under anesthesia—that are systematically unavailable to memory systems in the brain and that no human being has ever
reported. Maybe this is also true of the very last moments before death.
Here, however, I’m oﬀering a clearer and better deﬁned example of ineffability to illustrate the Ineﬀability Problem.
You can’t tell me if the green card I’m holding up is Green No. 24 or
Green No. 25. It is well known from perceptual psychology experiments
that our ability to discriminate sensory values such as hues greatly exceeds our ability to form direct concepts of them. But in order to talk
about this speciﬁc shade of green, you need a concept. Using a vague category, like “Some kind of light green,” is not enough, because you lose the
determinate value, the concrete qualitative suchness of the experience.
In between 430 and 650 nanometers, human beings can discriminate
more than 150 diﬀerent wavelengths, or diﬀerent subjective shades, of
color. But if asked to reidentify single colors with a high degree of accuracy, they can do so for fewer than 15. The same is true for other sensory
experiences. Normal listeners can discriminate about 1,400 steps of pitch
diﬀerence across the audible frequency range, but they can recognize
these steps as examples of only about 80 diﬀerent pitches. The University of Toronto philosopher Diana Raﬀman has stated the point clearly:

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

50

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 50

THE EGO TUNNEL

“We are much better at discriminating perceptual values (i.e. making
same/diﬀerent judgments) than we are at identifying or recognizing
them.”
Technically, this means we do not possess introspective identity criteria for many of the simplest states of consciousness. Our perceptual
memory is extremely limited. You can see and experience the diﬀerence
between Green No. 24 and Green No. 25 if you see both at the same
time, but you are unable consciously to represent the sameness of Green
No. 25 over time. Of course, it may appear to you to be the same shade
of Green No. 25, but the subjective experience of certainty going along
with this introspective belief is itself appearance only, not knowledge.
Thus, in a simple, well-deﬁned way, there is an element of ineﬀability in
sensory consciousness: You can experience a myriad of things in all their
glory and subtlety without having the means of reliably identifying
them. Without that, you cannot speak about them. Certain experts—
vintners, musicians, perfume designers—can train their senses to a
much ﬁner degree of discrimination and develop special technical terms
to describe their introspective experience. For example, connoisseurs
may describe the taste of wine as “connected,” “herby,” “nutty,” or “foxy.”
Nonetheless, even experts of introspection will never be able to exhaust
the vast space of ineﬀable nuances. Nor can ordinary people identify a
match to that beautiful shade of green they saw yesterday. That individual shade is not vague at all; it is what a scientist would call a maximally
determinate value, a concrete and absolutely unambiguous content of
consciousness.
As a philosopher, I like these kinds of ﬁndings, because they elegantly
demonstrate how subtle is the ﬂow of conscious experience. They show
that there are innumerable things in life you can fathom only by experiencing them, that there is a depth in pure perception that cannot be
grasped or invaded by thought or language. I also like the insight that
qualia, in the classic sense coined by Clarence Irving Lewis, never really
existed—a point also forcefully made by eminent philosopher of consciousness Daniel C. Dennett. Qualia is a term philosophers use for
simple sensory experiences, such as the redness of red, the awfulness of
pain, the sweetness of peach pie. Typically, the idea was that qualia form

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 51

A Tour of the Tunnel

51

recognizable inner essences, irreducible simple properties—the atoms
of experience. However, in a wonderful way, this story was too simple—
empirical consciousness research now shows us the ﬂuidity of subjective
experience, its uniqueness, the irreplaceable nature of the single moment of attention. There are no atoms, no nuggets of consciousness.
The Ineﬀability Problem is a serious challenge for a scientiﬁc theory
of consciousness—or at least for ﬁnding all its neural correlates. The
problem is simply put: To pinpoint the minimally suﬃcient neural correlate of Green No. 24 in the brain, you must assume your subjects’ verbal reports are reliable—that they can correctly identify the phenomenal
aspect of Green No. 24 over time, in repeated trials in a controlled experimental setting. They must be able to recognize introspectively the
subjectively experienced “suchness” of this particular shade of green—
and this seems to be impossible.
The Ineﬀability Problem arises for the simplest forms of sensory
awareness, for the ﬁnest nuances of sight and touch, of smell and taste,
and for those aspects of conscious hearing that underlie the magic and
beauty of a musical experience. But it may also appear for empathy, for
emotional and intrinsically embodied forms of communication (see
chapter 6 and my conversation with Vittorio Gallese, page 174). Once
again, these empirical ﬁndings are philosophically relevant, because
they redirect our attention to something we’ve known all along: Many
things you can express by way of music (or other art forms, like dance)
are ineﬀable, because they can never become the content of a mental
concept or be put into words. On the other hand, if this is so, sharing the
ineﬀable aspects of our conscious lives becomes a dubious aﬀair: We can
never be sure if our communication was successful; there is no certainty
about what actually it was we shared. Furthermore, the Ineﬀability Problem threatens the comprehensiveness of a neuroscientiﬁc theory of consciousness. If the primitives of sensory consciousness are evasive, in the
sense that even the experiencing subject possesses no internal criteria to
reidentify them by introspection, then we cannot match them with the
representational content of neural states—even in principle. Some internal criteria exist, but they are crude: absolutes, such as “pure sweetness,”
“pure blue,” “pure red,” and so on. But matching Green No. 24 or Green

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

52

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 52

THE EGO TUNNEL

No. 25 with their underlying physical substrates in a systematic manner
seems impossible, because these shades are just too subtle. If we cannot
do the mapping, we cannot do the reduction—that is, arrive at the claim
that your conscious experience of Green No. 24 is identical with a certain brain state in your head.
Remember, reduction is a relationship not between the phenomena
themselves but between theories. T1 is reduced to T2. One theory—say,
about our subjective, conscious experience—is reduced to another—say,
about large-scale dynamics in the brain. Theories are built out of sentences and concepts. But if there are no concepts for certain objects in
the domain of one theory, they cannot be mapped onto or reduced to
concepts in the other. This is why it may be impossible to do what most
hard scientists in consciousness research would like to do: show that
Green No. 24 is identical with a state in your head.
What to do? If identiﬁcation is not possible, elimination seems to be
the only alternative. If the qualities of sensory consciousness cannot be
turned into what philosophers call proper theoretical entities because
we have no identity criteria for them, then the cleanest way of solving
the Ineﬀability Problem may be to follow the path that neurophilosopher Paul Churchland and others suggested long ago—to deny the existence of qualia in the ﬁrst place. Would the best solution be simply to
say that by visually attending to this ineﬀable shade of Green No. 25 in
front of us, we are already directly in touch with a hardware property?
That is, what we experience is not some sort of phenomenal representational content but neural dynamics itself? In this view, our experience of
Green No. 25 would not be a conscious experience at all but instead
something physical—a brain state. For centuries, when speaking about
“qualities” and color experiences, we were actually misdescribing states
of our own bodies, internal states we never recognized as such—the
walls of the Ego Tunnel.
We could then posit that if we lack the necessary ﬁrst-person
knowledge, then we must deﬁne third-person criteria for these ineﬀable states. If there are no adequate phenomenological concepts, let’s
form adequate neurobiological concepts instead. Certainly if we look
at the brain dynamics underlying what subjects later describe as their

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 53

A Tour of the Tunnel

53

conscious experience of greenness, we will observe sameness across
time. In principle, we can ﬁnd objective identity criteria, some mathematical property, something that remains the same in our description
connecting the experience of green you had yesterday with the experience you’re having right now. And then could we not communicate
our inner experiences in neurobiological terms, by saying something
like “Imagine the Cartesian product of the experiential green manifold
and the Möbius strip of calmness—that is, mildly K-314γ, but moving
to Q-512δ and also slightly resembling the 372.509-dimensional shape
of Irish moss in norm-space”?
I actually do like science ﬁction. This sci-ﬁ scenario is conceivable, in
principle. But are we willing to give up our authority over our own inner
states—the authority allowing us to say that these two states must be the
same because they feel the same? Are we willing to hand this epistemological authority over to the empirical sciences of the mind? This is the
core of the Ineﬀability Problem, and certainly many of us would not be
ready to take the jump into a new system of description. Because traditional folk-psychology is not only a theory but also a practice, there may
be a number of deeper problems with Churchland’s strategy of what he
calls “eliminative materialism.” In his words, “Eliminative materialism is
the thesis that our commonsense conception of psychological phenomena constitutes a radically false theory, a theory so fundamentally defective that both the principles and the ontology of that theory will
eventually be displaced, rather than smoothly reduced, by completed
neuroscience.” Churchland has an original and refreshingly diﬀerent
perspective: If we just gave up the idea that we ever had anything like
conscious minds in the ﬁrst place and began to train our native mechanisms of introspection with the help of the new and much more ﬁnegrained conceptual distinctions oﬀered by neuroscience, then we would
also discover much more, we would enrich our inner lives by becoming
materialists. “I suggest, then, that those of us who prize the ﬂux and
content of our subjective phenomenological experience need not view
the advance of materialist neuroscience with fear and foreboding,” he
has noted. “Quite the contrary. The genuine arrival of a materialist kinematics and dynamics for psychological states and cognitive processes

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

54

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 54

THE EGO TUNNEL

will constitute not a gloom in which our inner life is suppressed or
eclipsed, but rather a dawning, in which its marvelous intricacies are ﬁnally revealed—most notably, if we apply [it] ourselves, in direct selfconscious introspection.”
Still, many people would be disinclined to turn something that was
previously ineﬀable into a public property about which they could communicate using the vocabulary of neuroscience. They would feel that
this was not what they wanted to know at the outset. More important,
they might fear that in pursuit of solving the problem, we had lost something deeper along the way. Theories of consciousness have cultural
consequences. I will return to this issue.

THE EVOLUTION PROBLEM: COULDN’T A LL
OF THIS HAVE HA PPENED IN THE DA RK?
The Evolution Problem is one of the most diﬃcult problems for a theory
of consciousness. Why, and in what sense, was it necessary to develop
something like consciousness in the nervous systems of animals?
Couldn’t zombies have evolved instead? Here, the answer is both yes
and no.
As I noted in the Introduction, conscious experience is not an all-ornothing phenomenon; it comes in many shades and ﬂavors. There is a
long history of consciousness on this planet. We have strong, converging evidence that all of Earth’s warm-blooded vertebrates (and probably
certain other creatures) enjoy phenomenal experience. The basic brain
features of sensory consciousness are preserved among mammals and
exhibit strong homologies due to common ancestry. They may not have
language and conceptual thought, but it is likely that they all have sensations and emotions. They are clearly able to suﬀer. But since they do all
this without verbal reports, it is almost impossible to investigate this issue more deeply. What we must understand is how Homo sapiens managed to acquire—over the course of our biological history and
individually as infants—this amazing property of living our lives in the
Ego Tunnel successfully and without realizing it.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 55

A Tour of the Tunnel

55

First, let’s not forget that evolution is driven by chance, does not
pursue a goal, and achieved what we now consider the continuous optimization of nervous systems in a blind process of hereditary variation
and selection. It is incorrect to assume that evolution had to invent
consciousness—in principle it could have been a useless by-product.
No necessity was involved. Not everything is an adaptation, and even
adaptations are not optimally designed, because natural selection can
act only on what is already there. Other routes and solutions were and
remain possible. Nevertheless, a lot of what happened in our brains and
in those of our ancestors clearly was adaptive and had survival value.
Today, we have a long list of potential candidate functions of consciousness: Among them are the emergence of intrinsically motivating
states, the enhancement of social coordination, a strategy for improving the internal selection and resource allocation in brains that got too
complex to regulate themselves, the modiﬁcation and interrogation of
goal hierarchies and long-term plans, retrieval of episodes from longterm memory, construction of storable representations, ﬂexibility and
sophistication of behavioral control, mind reading and behavior prediction in social interaction, conﬂict resolution and troubleshooting, creating a densely integrated representation of reality as a whole, setting a
context, learning in a single step, and so on. It is hard to believe that
consciousness should have none of these functions. Consider one example only.
There is a consensus among many leading ﬁgures in the consciousness
community that at least one of the central functions of phenomenal experience is making information “globally available” to an organism. Bernard
Baars’s global-workspace metaphor has a functional aspect: Put simply,
this theory says that conscious information is that subset of active information in the brain that requires monitoring because it’s not clear which
of your mental capacities you will need to access this information next.
Will you need to direct focal attention at it? Will you need to form a concept of it, to think about it, to report it to other human beings? Will you
need to make a ﬂexible behavioral response—one that you have selected
and weighed against alternatives? Will you need to link this information

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

56

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 56

THE EGO TUNNEL

to episodic memory, perhaps in order to compare it with things you
have seen or heard before? Part of Baars’s idea is that you become conscious of something only when you don’t know which of the tools in
your mental toolbox you’ll have to use next.
Note that when you learn a diﬃcult task for the ﬁrst time, such as tying your shoes or riding a bicycle, your practicing is always conscious. It
requires attention, and it takes up many of your resources. Yet as soon as
you’ve mastered tying your shoes or riding a bicycle, you forget all about
the learning process—to the point that it becomes diﬃcult to teach the
skill to your children. It quickly sinks below the threshold of awareness
and becomes a fast and eﬃcient subroutine. But whenever the system is
confronted with a novel or challenging stimulus, its global workspace is
activated and represented in consciousness. This is also the point when
you become aware of the process.
Of course, a much more diﬀerentiated theory is needed, because
there are degrees of availability. Some things in life, such as the ineﬀable
shade of Green No. 25, are available for attention, say, but not for memory or conceptual thought. Other things are available for selective motor
control but are accessed so quickly you don’t really attend to them: If
100-yard sprinters were to wait until they consciously heard the starter’s
shot, they would already have lost the race; fortunately, their body hears
it before they do. There are many degrees of conscious experience, and
the closer science looks, the more blurry the border between conscious
and unconscious processing becomes. But the general notion of global
availability allows us to tell a convincing story about the evolution of
consciousness. Here is my part of the story: Consciousness is a new kind
of organ.
Biological organisms evolved two diﬀerent kinds of organs. One
kind, such as the liver or the heart, forms part of an organism’s “hardware.” Organs of this type are permanently realized. Then there are “virtual organs”—feelings (courage, anger, desire) and the phenomenal
experience of seeing colored objects or hearing music or having a certain episodic memory. The immune response, which is realized only
when needed, is another example of a virtual organ: For a certain time, it
creates special causal properties, has a certain function, and does a job

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 57

A Tour of the Tunnel

57

for the organism. When the job is done, it disappears. Virtual organs are
like physical organs in that they fulﬁll a speciﬁc function; they are coherent assemblies of functional properties that allow you to do new things.
Though part of a behavioral repertoire on the macro level of observable
traits, they can also be seen as composed of billions of concerted microevents—immune cells or neurons ﬁring away. Unlike a liver or a heart,
they are realized transiently. What we subjectively experience are the
processes brought about by the ongoing activity of one or many of such
virtual organs.
Our virtual organs make information globally available to us, allowing
us to access new facts and sometimes entirely new forms of knowledge.
Take as an example the fact that you are holding this book in your hands
right now. The phenomenal book (i.e., the conscious book-experience)
and the phenomenal hands (i.e., the conscious experience of certain parts
of a bodily self ) are examples of currently active virtual organs. The neural correlates in your brain work for you as object emulators, internally
simulating the book you are holding, without your being aware of the
fact. The same is true of the conscious hand-experience, which is part of
the bodily subject emulator. The brain is also making other facts available
to you: the fact that this book exists, that it has certain invariant surface
properties, a certain weight, and so on. As soon as all this information
about the existence and properties of the book becomes conscious, it is
available for the guidance of attention, for further cognitive processing,
for ﬂexible behavior.
Now we can begin to see what the central evolutionary function of
consciousness must have been: It makes classes of facts globally available for an organism and thereby allows it to attend to them, to think
about them, and to react to them in a ﬂexible manner that automatically
takes the overall context into account. Only if a world appears to you in
the ﬁrst place can you begin to grasp the fact that an outside reality exists. This is the necessary precondition for discovering the fact that you
exist as well. Only if you have a consciousness tunnel can you realize
that you are part of this reality and are present in it right now.
Moreover, as soon as this global stage—the consciousness tunnel—
has been stabilized, many other types of virtual organs can be generated

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

58

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 58

THE EGO TUNNEL

and begin their dance in your nervous system. Consciousness is an inherently biological phenomenon, and the tunnel is what holds it all together. Within the tunnel, the choreography of your subjective life
begins to unfold. You can experience conscious emotions and thereby
discover that you have certain goals and needs. You can apprehend
yourself as a thinker of thoughts. You can discover that there are other
people—other agents—in the environment and learn about your relationship to them; unless a certain type of conscious experience makes
this fact globally available to you, you cannot cooperate with them, selectively imitate them, or learn from them in other ways. If you are
smart, you may even begin to control their behavior by controlling their
conscious states. If you successfully deceive them—if, say, you manage
to install a false belief in their minds—then you have activated a virtual
organ in another brain.
Phenomenal states are neurocomputational organs that make survivalrelevant information globally available within a window of presence.
They let you become aware of new facts within a uniﬁed psychological
moment. Clearly, being able to use all the tools in your mental toolbox
to react to new classes of facts must have been a major adaptive advantage. Every new virtual organ, every new sensory experience, every new
conscious thought had a metabolic price; it was costly to activate them,
if only for a couple of seconds or minutes at a time. But since they paid
for themselves in terms of additional glucose, and in terms of security,
survival, and procreation, they spread across populations and sustain
themselves to this day. They allowed us to discriminate between what
we can eat and what we can’t, to search for and detect novel sources of
food, to plan our attack on our prey. They allowed us to read other
people’s minds and cooperate more eﬃciently with our fellow hunters.
Finally, they allowed us to learn from past experience.
The interim conclusion is that making a world appear in an organism’s brain was a new computational strategy. Flagging the dangerous
present world as real kept us from getting lost in our memories and our
fantasies. Flagging the present enables a conscious organism to plan
diﬀerent and more eﬃcient ways of escape or of deceiving or stalking
its prey, namely by comparing internal dry runs of the target behavior

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 59

A Tour of the Tunnel

59

with the features of a given world. If you have a conscious, transparent
world-model, you can, for the ﬁrst time, directly compare what is actual
with what is only possible, the actual world with simulated possible
worlds you’ve designed in your mind. High-level intelligence means
not only having oﬄine states in which you can simulate potential
threats or desired outcomes but also comparing the real situation with
a number of possible goal-states. After you have found a path from the
real world into the most desirable possible world in your mind, you
can begin to act.
It is easy to overlook the causal relevance of this ﬁrst evolutionary
step, the fundamental computational goal of conscious experience. It is
the one necessary functional property on which everything else rests.
We can simply call it “reality generation”: It allowed animals to represent
explicitly the fact that something is actually the case. A transparent
world-model lets you discover that something is really out there, and by
integrating your portrait of the world with the subjective Now, it lets
you grasp the fact that the world is present. This step opened up a new
level of complexity. Thus, having a global world-model is a new way of
processing information about the world in a highly integrated manner.
Every conscious thought, every bodily sensation, every sound and every
sight, every experience of empathy or of sharing the goals of another human being makes a diﬀerent class of facts available for the adaptive, ﬂexible, and selective form of processing that only conscious experience can
provide. Whatever is elevated to the level of global availability suddenly
becomes more ﬂuid and more context-sensitive and is directly related to
all other contents of your conscious mind.
The functions of global availability can be speciﬁc: Conscious color
vision gives you information about nutritional value, as when you notice
the luscious red berries among the green leaves. The conscious experience of empathy provides you with a nonlinguistic form of knowledge
about the emotional states of a fellow human being. Once you have this
form of awareness, you can attend to it, adapt your motor behavior to it,
and associate it with memories of the past. Phenomenal states do not just
represent facts about berries or about the feelings of other human beings; they also bind these things into a global processing stage and allow

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

60

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 60

THE EGO TUNNEL

you to use all your mental capacities to explore them further. In short,
individual conscious experiences from the object level upward are virtual organs that transiently make knowledge available to you in an entirely new data format—the consciousness tunnel. And your uniﬁed
global model of a single world provides a holistic frame of reference in
which all this can take place.
If a creature such as Homo sapiens evolves the additional ability to
run oﬄine simulations in its mind, then it can represent possible
worlds—worlds that are not experienced as present. This species can
have episodic memory. It can develop the ability to plan. It can ask itself,
“How would a world look in which I had many children? What would
the world be like if I were perfectly healthy? Or if I were rich and famous? And how can I make these things happen? Can I imagine a path
leading from the present world into this imagined world?”
Such a being can also enjoy mental time travel, because it can switch
back and forth between “inside-time” and “outside-time.” It can compare
present experiences to past ones—but it can also hallucinate or get lost
in its own daydreams. If it wants to use these new mental abilities properly, its brain must come up with a robust and reliable way to tell the difference between representation and simulation. The being must stay
anchored in the real world; if you lose yourself in daydreams, sooner or
later another animal will come along and eat you. Therefore, you need a
mechanism that reliably shows you the diﬀerence between the one real
world and the many possible ones. And this trick must be achieved on
the level of conscious experience itself, which is not an easy problem. As
I discussed, conscious experience already is a simulation and never
brings the subject of experience—you—into direct contact with reality.
So the question is, How can you avoid getting lost in the labyrinth of
your conscious mind?
A major function of the transparent conscious model of reality is to
represent facticity—that is, to generate a rock-bottom frame of reference for the organism using it: something that unfailingly deﬁnes what is
real (even if it isn’t); something you cannot fool around or tamper with.
Transparency solved the problem of simulating a multitude of possible

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 61

A Tour of the Tunnel

61

inner worlds without getting lost in them; it did so by allowing biological organisms to represent explicitly that one of those worlds is an actual
reality. I call this the “world-zero hypothesis.”
Human beings know that some of their conscious experiences do not
refer to the real world but are only representations in their minds. Now
we can see how fundamental this step was, and we can recognize its
functional value. Not only were we able to have conscious thoughts, but
we could also experience them as thoughts, rather than hallucinating or
getting lost in a fantasy. This step allowed us to become superbly intelligent. It let us compare our memories and goals and plans with our present situation, and it helped us seek mental bridges from the present to a
more desirable reality.
The distinction between things that only appear to us and real, objective facts became an element of our lived reality. (Please note that this
is probably not true of most other animals on this planet.) By consciously experiencing some elements of our tunnel as mere images or
thoughts about the world, we became aware of the possibility of misrepresentation. We understood that sometimes we can be wrong, since reality is only a speciﬁc type of appearance. As evolved representational
systems, we could now represent one of the most important facts about
ourselves—namely, that we are representational systems. We were able
to grasp the notions of truth and falsity, of knowledge and illusion. As
soon as we had grasped this distinction, cultural evolution exploded, because we became ever more intelligent by systematically increasing
knowledge and minimizing illusion.
The discovery of the appearance/reality distinction was possible because we realized that some of the content of our conscious minds is
constructed internally and because we could introspectively apprehend
the construction process. The technical term here would be phenomenal opacity—the opposite of transparency. Those things in the evolution
of consciousness that are old, ultrafast, and extremely reliable—such as
the qualities of sensory experience—are transparent; abstract conscious
thought is not. From an evolutionary perspective, thinking is very
new, quite unreliable (as we all know), and so slow that we can actually

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

62

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 62

THE EGO TUNNEL

observe it going on in our brains. In conscious reasoning, we witness the
formation of thoughts; some processing stages are available for introspective attention. Therefore, we know that our thoughts are not given
but made.
The inner appearance of a fully realistic world, as present in the here
and now, was an elegant way of creating a frame of reference and a reliable anchor for all those kinds of mental activity necessary for higher
forms of intelligence. You can grasp and design possible worlds only if a
robust ﬁrst-order reality is already in place. That was the fundamental
breakthrough—as well as the central function of consciousness as such.
As it turned out, the consciousness tunnel possessed obvious survival
value and was adaptive because it supplied a uniﬁed and robust frame of
reference for higher levels of reality-modeling. Nevertheless, all this is
not even half the story: We need to take one last step up the ladder, a big
one. Our brief tour d’horizon concludes with the deepest and most diﬃcult puzzle of all: the subjectivity of consciousness.

THE WHO PROBLEM: WHAT IS THE ENTITY
THAT HA S CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE?
Consciousness is always bound to an individual ﬁrst-person perspective;
this is part of what makes it so elusive. It is a subjective phenomenon.
Someone has it. In a deep and indisputable way, your inner world truly
is not just someone’s inner world but your inner world—a private realm
of experience that only you have direct access to.
The conscious mind is not a public object—or such is the orthodox
view, which may yet be overthrown by the Consciousness Revolution.
In any event, the orthodox view holds that scientiﬁc research can be
conducted only on objects exhibiting properties that are, at least in
principle, observable to all of us. Green No. 24 is not. Neither is the distinct sensory quality of the scent of mixed amber and sandalwood, nor
is your empathic experience of understanding the emotions of another
human being when you see him in tears. Brain states, on the other
hand, are observable. Brain states also clearly have what philosophers

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 63

A Tour of the Tunnel

63

call representational content. There are receptive ﬁelds for the various
sensory stimuli. We know where emotional content originates, and we
have good candidates for the seat of episodic memory in the brain, and
so on.
Conscious experience has content, too—phenomenal content—and I
touched upon it in the Introduction: Its phenomenal content is its subjective character—how an experience privately and inwardly feels to
you, what it is like to have it. But this particular content, it seems, is accessible only to a single person—you, the experiencing subject. And
who is that?
To form a successful theory of consciousness, we must match ﬁrstperson phenomenal content to third-person brain content. We must
somehow reconcile the inner perspective of the experiencing self with
the outside perspective of science. And there will always be many of us
who intuitively think this can never be done. Many people think consciousness is ontologically irreducible (as philosophers say), because
ﬁrst-person facts cannot be reduced to third-person facts. It is more
likely, however, that consciousness is epistemically irreducible (as
philosophers say). The idea is simple: One reality, one kind of fact, but
two kinds of knowledge: ﬁrst-person knowledge and third-person
knowledge. Even though consciousness is a physical process, these two
diﬀerent forms of knowing can never be conﬂated. Knowing every last
thing about a person’s brain states will never allow us to know what they
are like for the person herself. But the concept of a ﬁrst-person perspective turns out to be vague the moment we take a close look at it. What is
this mysterious ﬁrst person? What does the word “I” refer to? If not simply to the speaker, does it refer to anything in the known world at all? Is
the existence of an experiencing self a necessary component of consciousness? I don’t think it is—for one thing, because there seem to be
“self-less” forms of conscious experience. In certain severe psychiatric
disorders, such as Cotard’s syndrome, patients sometimes stop using
the ﬁrst-person pronoun and, moreover, claim that they do not really
exist. M. David Enoch and William Trethowan have described such
cases in their book Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes: “Subsequently

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

64

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 64

THE EGO TUNNEL

the subject may proceed to deny her very existence, even dispensing altogether with the use of the personal pronoun ‘I’. One patient even
called herself ‘Madam Zero’ in order to emphasize her non-existence.
One [patient] said, referring to herself, ‘It’s no use. Wrap it up and throw
“it” in the dustbin’.”
Mystics of all cultures and all times have reported deep spiritual experiences in which no “self ” was present, and some of them, too,
stopped using the pronoun “I.” Indeed, many of the simple organisms on
this planet may have a consciousness tunnel with nobody living in it.
Perhaps some of them have only a consciousness “bubble” instead of a
tunnel, because, together with the self, awareness of past or future disappears as well.
Note that up to now, in deﬁning the problems for a grand uniﬁed
theory of consciousness, we have assumed only a minimalist notion:
the appearance of a world. But as you are reading these sentences, not
only is the light on but there is also somebody home. Human consciousness is characterized by various forms of inwardness, all of which
inﬂuence one another: First, it is an internal process in the nervous system; second, it creates the experience of being in a world; third, the virtual window of presence gives us temporal internality, a Now. But the
deepest form of inwardness was the creation of an internal self/world
border.
In evolution, this process started physically, with the development of
cell membranes and an immune system to deﬁne which cells in one’s
body were to be treated as one’s own and which were intruders. Billions of years later, nervous systems were able to represent this
self/world distinction on a higher level—for instance, as body boundaries delineated by an integrated but as yet unconscious body schema.
Conscious experience then elevated this fundamental strategy of partitioning reality to a previously unknown level of complexity and intelligence. The phenomenal self was born, and the conscious experience of
being someone gradually emerged. A self-model, an inner image of the
organism as a whole, was built into the world-model, and this is how the
consciously experienced ﬁrst-person perspective developed.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 65

A Tour of the Tunnel

65

How to comprehend subjectivity is the deepest puzzle in consciousness research. In order to overcome it, we must understand how the
conscious self was born into the tunnel, how nature managed to evolve a
centered model of reality, creating inner worlds that not only appear but
that appear to someone. We must understand how the consciousness
tunnel turned into an Ego Tunnel.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 66

C H AP TER T WO APPENDIX
T HE UNIT Y OF CON SC IOU SNE SS :
A CONV ER S AT ION W IT H W OLF SINGER

Wolf Singer is professor of neurophysiology and director of the Department of Neurophysiology at the
Max Planck Institute for Brain Research in Frankfurt, Germany. In 2004, he founded the Frankfurt
Institute for Advanced Studies (FIAS), which conducts basic theoretical research in various areas of
science, bringing together theorists from the disciplines of biology, chemistry, neuroscience, physics,
and computer science. His main research interest
lies in understanding the neuronal processes underlying higher cognitive functions, such as visual perception, memory, and attention. He is
also dedicated to making the results of brain research known to the general public and is a recipient of the Max Planck Prize for Public Science.
Singer has been particularly active in the philosophical debate concerning free will. He is coeditor (with Christoph Engel) of Better Than
Conscious? Decision Making, the Human Mind, and Implications for Institutions (2008).

66

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 67

A Tour of the Tunnel

67

Metzinger: Wolf, given the current state of the art, what is the relation
between consciousness and feature-binding?
Singer: A unique property of consciousness is its coherence. The contents of consciousness change continuously, at the pace of the experienced present, but at any one moment all the contents of
phenomenal awareness are related to one another, unless there is a
pathological condition causing a disintegration of conscious experience. This suggests a close relation between consciousness and binding. It seems that only those results of the numerous computational
processes that have been bound successfully will enter consciousness
simultaneously. This notion also establishes a close link among consciousness, short-term memory, and attention. Evidence indicates
that stimuli need to be attended to in order to be perceived consciously, and only then will they have access to short-term memory.
Metzinger: But why is there a binding problem to begin with?
Singer: The binding problem results from two distinct features of the
brain: First, the brain is a highly distributed system, in which a very
large number of operations are carried out in parallel; second, it
lacks a single convergence center, in which the results of these parallel computations could be evaluated in a coherent way. The various
processing modules are interconnected, in an exceedingly dense
and complex network of reciprocal connections, and these appear
to be generating globally ordered states, by means of powerful selforganizing mechanisms. It follows that representations of complex
cognitive contents—perceptual objects, thoughts, action plans, reactivated memories—must have a distributed structure as well. This
requires that neurons participating in a distributed representation of
a particular type of content convey two messages in parallel: First,
they have to signal whether the feature they’re tuned to is present;
second, they have to indicate which of the many other neurons
they’re cooperating with in forming a distributed representation. It
is widely accepted that neurons signal the presence of the feature
they encode by increasing their discharge frequency; however,
there’s less consensus about how neurons signal with which other
neurons they cooperate.
Metzinger: What are the constraints for such a signaling?

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

68

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 68

THE EGO TUNNEL

Singer: Because representations of cognitive contents can change rapidly, it needs to be decipherable with very high temporal resolution.
We’ve proposed that the relation-deﬁning signature is the precise
synchronization of the discharges of the individual neurons.
Metzinger: But why synchronization?
Singer: Precise synchronization increases the impact of neuronal discharges, favoring further joint processing of the synchronized messages. Further evidence indicates that such synchronization is best
achieved if neurons engage in rhythmic, oscillatory discharges, because oscillatory processes can be synchronized more easily than
temporally unstructured activation sequences.
Metzinger: Then this isn’t just a hypothesis—there’s supportive experimental evidence.
Singer: Since the discovery of synchronized oscillatory discharges in the
visual cortex more than a decade ago, more and more evidence has
supported the hypothesis that synchronization of oscillatory activity
may be the mechanism for the binding of distributed brain
processes—whereas the relevant oscillation frequencies diﬀer for
diﬀerent structures and in the cerebral cortex typically cover the
range of beta- and gamma-oscillations: 20 to 80 Hz. What makes
the synchronization phenomena particularly interesting in the present context is that they occur in association with a number of functions relevant for conscious experience.
Metzinger: Which functions are those?
Singer: These oscillations occur during the encoding of perceptual objects, when coherent representations of the various attributes of
these objects have to be formed. The oscillations are consistently
observed when subjects direct their attention toward an object and
retain information about it in working memory. And ﬁnally, the oscillations are a distinctive correlate of conscious perception.
Metzinger: What is the evidence here?
Singer: In a test in which subjects are exposed to stimuli that are degraded by noise so that the stimuli are consciously perceived only half
the time, you can study the brain activity selectively associated with
conscious experience. Since the physical attributes of the stimuli are

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 69

A Tour of the Tunnel

69

the same throughout, you can simply compare brain signals in cases
where the subjects consciously perceive the stimuli with the signals
in cases where they don’t. Investigations reveal that during conscious
perception, widely distributed regions of the cerebral cortex transiently engage in precisely synchronized high-frequency oscillations.
When the stimuli are not consciously perceived, the various processing regions still engage in high-frequency oscillations—indicating
that some stimulus-processing is performed—but these are local
processes and do not join into globally synchronized patterns. This
suggests that access to consciousness requires that a suﬃciently large
number of processing areas—or in other words, a suﬃcient number
of distributed computations—be bound by synchronization and that
those coherent states be maintained over a suﬃciently long period.
Metzinger: This could be interesting from a philosophical perspective.
Wouldn’t this ideally account for the unity of consciousness?
Singer: Indeed, this would also account for the unity of consciousness—
for the fact that the contents of phenomenal awareness, although
they change from moment to moment, are always experienced as
coherent. Admittedly, the argument is somewhat circular, but if it is
a necessary prerequisite for access to consciousness that activity be
suﬃciently synchronized across a suﬃcient number of processing
regions, and if synchronization is equivalent with semantic binding,
with integrating the meaning, it follows that the contents of consciousness can only be coherent.
Metzinger: What remains to be shown, if what you describe here turns
out to be the case?
Singer: Even if the proposed scenario turns out to be true, the question
remains as to whether we have arrived at a satisfactory description
of the neuronal correlates of consciousness. What do we gain by saying that the neuronal correlate of consciousness is a particular
metastable state of a very complex, highly dynamic, nonstationary distributed system—a state characterized by sequences of ever-changing
patterns of precisely synchronized oscillations? Further research will
lead to more detailed descriptions of such states—but these will likely
be abstract, mathematical descriptions of state vectors. Eventually,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

70

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 70

THE EGO TUNNEL

advanced analytic methods may reveal the semantic content, the actual meaning of such state vectors, and it may become possible to
manipulate these states and thereby alter the contents of consciousness, thus providing causal evidence for the relation between neuronal activity and the contents of phenomenal awareness. However,
this is probably about as close as we can come, in our attempts to
identify the neuronal correlates of consciousness. How these neuronal activation patterns eventually give rise to subjective feelings,
emotions, and so on, will probably remain a conundrum for quite
some time even if we arrive at precise descriptions of neuronal
states corresponding to consciousness.
Metzinger: In your ﬁeld, what are the most urgent questions, and where
is the ﬁeld moving?
Singer: The most challenging questions are how information is encoded in distributed neuronal networks and how subjective feelings, the so-called qualia, emerge from distributed neuronal
activity. It is commonly held that neurons convey information by
modulating their discharge rate—that is, by signaling the presence
of contents for which they are specialized through increases in
their ﬁring rate. However, accumulating evidence suggests that
complex cognitive contents are encoded by the activity of distributed assemblies of neurons and that the information is contained
in the relations between the amplitudes and in the duration of the
discharges. The great challenge for future work is to extract the information encoded in these high-dimensional time series. This requires simultaneous recordings from a large number of neurons
and identiﬁcation of the relevant spatio-temporal patterns. It is
still unclear which aspects of the large number of possible patterns
the nervous system exploits to encode information, so searching
for these patterns will require developing new and highly sophisticated mathematical search algorithms. Thus, we’ll need close collaboration between experimentalists and theoreticians to advance
our understanding of the neuronal processes underlying higher
cognitive functions.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 71

A Tour of the Tunnel

71

Metzinger: Wolf, why are you so interested in philosophy, and what
kind of philosophy would you like to see in the future? What relevant contributions from the humanities are you waiting for?
Singer: My interest in philosophy is nurtured by the evidence that
progress in neurobiology will provide some answers to the classic
questions treated in philosophy. This is the case for epistemology,
philosophy of mind, and moral philosophy. Progress in cognitive
neuroscience will tell us how we perceive and to what extent our
perceptions are reconstructions rather than representations of absolute realities. As we learn more about the emergence of mental
functions from complex neuronal interactions, we will gain insight
into possible solutions of the mind-body problem, and as we learn to
understand how our brains assign values and distinguish between
appropriate and inappropriate conditions, we will learn more about
the evolution and constitution of morality.
Conversely, cognitive neuroscience needs the humanities—for
several reasons. First, progress in the neurosciences raises a large
number of new ethical problems, and these need to be addressed not
only by neurobiologists but also by representatives of the humanities.
Second, as neuroscience progresses, more and more phenomena that
have traditionally been the subject of humanities research can be investigated with neuroscientiﬁc methods; thus, the humanities will
provide the taxonomy and description of phenomena awaiting investigation at the neuronal level. Brain research begins with the analysis
of such phenomena as empathy, jealousy, altruism, shared attention,
and social imprinting—phenomena that have traditionally been described and analyzed by psychologists, sociologists, economists, and
philosophers. Classiﬁcation and precise description of these phenomena are prerequisites for the neuroscientiﬁc attempts to identify
the underlying neuronal processes. There will undoubtedly be close
collaborations in the near future between the neurosciences and the
humanities—a fortunate development, as it promises to overcome
some of the dividing lines that have segregated the natural sciences
from the humanities over the last centuries.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 72

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

PART TWO

Page 73

IDEAS
AND
DISCOVERIES

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 74

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 75

three


OUT OF THE BODY A ND INTO THE MIND
Body Image, Out-of-Body Experiences, and the Virtual Self

“Owning” your body, its sensations, and its various parts is fundamental
to the feeling of being someone. Your body image is surprisingly ﬂexible.
Expert skiers, for example, can extend their consciously experienced
body image to the tips of their skis. Race-car drivers can expand it to include the boundaries of the car; they do not have to judge visually
whether they can squeeze through a narrow opening or avoid an obstacle—they simply feel it. Have you ever tried to walk with your eyes
closed, or in the dark, tapping ahead with a stick as a blind person does?
If so, you’ve probably noticed that you suddenly start to feel a tactile
sensation at the end of the stick. All these are examples of what philosophers call the sense of ownership, which is a speciﬁc aspect of conscious
experience—a form of automatic self-attribution that integrates a certain kind of conscious content into what is experienced as one’s self.
Neuroimaging studies have given us a good ﬁrst idea of what happens in the brain when the sense of ownership, as illustrated by the
rubber-hand experiment discussed in the Introduction, is transferred
from a subject’s real arm to the rubber hand: Figure 2 shows areas of increased activity in the premotor cortex. It is plausible to assume that at
the moment you consciously experience the rubber hand as part of
75

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

76

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 76

THE EGO TUNNEL

Figure 2: The rubber-hand illusion. The illustration on the right shows the subject’s illusion
as the felt strokes are aligned with the seen strokes of the probe. The dark areas show
heightened activity in the brain; the phenomenally experienced, illusory position of the
arm is indicated by the light outline. The underlying activation of neurons in the
premotor cortex is demonstrated by experimental data. (Botvinick & Cohen, “Rubber
Hand ‘Feels’ Touch,” ibid.)

your body, a fusion of the tactile and visual receptive ﬁelds takes place
and is reﬂected by the activation of neurons in the premotor cortex.
The rubber-hand illusion helps us understand the interplay among
vision, touch, and proprioception, the sense of body posture and balance originating in your vestibular system. Your bodily self-model is created by a process of multisensory integration, based on a simple
statistical correlation your brain has discovered. The phenomenal incorporation of the rubber hand into your self-model results from correlated
tactile and visual inputs. As the brain detects the synchronicity underlying this correlation, it automatically forms a new, coherent representation. The consciously experienced sense of ownership follows.
In Matthew Botvinick and Jonathan Cohen’s study, subjects were
asked to close their eyes and point to their concealed left hand; they
tended to point in the direction of the rubber one, with the degree of
mispointing dependent on the reported duration of the illusion. In a
similar experiment, conducted by K. C. Armel and V. S. Ramachandran
at UCSD’s Brain and Perception Laboratory, if one of the rubber ﬁngers

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 77

Out of the Body and into the Mind

77

was bent backward into a physiologically impossible position, subjects
not only experienced their phenomenal ﬁnger as being bent but also exhibited a signiﬁcant skin-conductance reaction, indicating that unconscious autonomous mechanisms, which cannot be controlled at will,
were also reacting to the assumption that the rubber hand was part of
the self. Only two out of one hundred and twenty subjects reported feeling actual pain, but many pulled back their real hands and widened their
eyes in alarm or laughed nervously.
The beauty of the rubber-hand illusion is that you can try it at home.
It clearly shows that the consciously experienced sense of ownership is
directly determined by representational processes in the brain. Note
how, in your subjective experience, the transition from shoulder to rubber hand is seamless. Subjectively, they are both part of one and the
same bodily self; the quality of “ownership” is continuous and distributed evenly between them. You don’t need to do anything to achieve this
eﬀect. It seems to be the result of complex, dynamic self-organization in
the brain. The emergence of the bodily self-model—the conscious image of the body as a whole—is based on a subpersonal, automatic
process of binding diﬀerent features together—of achieving coherence.
This coherent structure is what you experience as your own body and
your own limbs.
There are a number of intriguing further facts—such as the ﬁnding
that subjects will mislocate their real hand only when the rubber one is
in a physiologically realistic position. This indicates that “top-down”
processes, such as expectations about body shape, play an important
role. For example, a principle of “body constancy” seems to be at work,
keeping the number of arms at two. The rubber hand displaces the real
hand rather than merely being mistaken for it. Recently, psychometric
studies have shown that the feeling of having a body is made up of various subcomponents—the three most important being ownership,
agency, and location—which can be dissociated. “Me-ness” cannot be
reduced to “here-ness,” and, more important, agency (that is, the performance of an action) and ownership are distinct, identiﬁable, and separable aspects of subjective experience. Gut feelings (“interoceptive
body perception”) and background emotions are another important

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

78

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 78

THE EGO TUNNEL

cluster anchoring the conscious self, but it is becoming obvious that
ownership is closest to the core of our target property of selfhood. Nevertheless, the experience of being an embodied self is a holistic construct, characterized by part-whole relationships and stemming from
many diﬀerent sources.
Phenomenal ownership is not only at the heart of conscious selfexperience; it also has unconscious precursors. Classical neurology hypothesized about a body schema, an unconscious but constantly
updated brain map of limb positions, body shape, and posture. Recent
research shows that Japanese macaques can be trained to use tools even
though they only rarely exhibit tool use in their natural environment.
During successful tool use, changes occur in speciﬁc neural networks in
their brains, a ﬁnding suggesting that the tools are temporarily integrated into their body schemata. When a food pellet is dispensed beyond their reach and they use a rake to bring it closer, a change is
observed in their bodily self-model in the brain. In fact, it looks as
though their model of their hand and of the space around it is extended
to the tip of the tool; that is, on the level of the monkey’s model of reality, properties of the hand are transferred to the tool’s tip. Certain visual receptive ﬁelds now extend from a region just beyond the
ﬁngertips to the tip of the rake the monkey is holding, because the parietal lobe in its brain has temporarily incorporated the rake into the
body model. In human beings, repeated practice can turn the tip of a
tool into a part of the hand, and the tool can be used as sensitively and
as skillfully as the ﬁngers.
Recent neuroscientiﬁc data indicate that any successful extension of
behavioral space is mirrored in the neural substrate of the body image in
the brain. The brain constructs an internalized image of the tool by assimilating it into the existing body image. Of course, we do not know whether
monkeys actually have the conscious experience of ownership or only the
unconscious mechanism. But we do know of several similarities between
macaques and human beings that make plausible the assumption that the
macaques’ morphed and augmented bodily self is conscious.
One exciting aspect of these new data is that they shed light on the
evolution of tool use. A necessary precondition of expanding your

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 79

Out of the Body and into the Mind

Touch-vision at the hand

79

Touch-vision at the tool tip

Figure 3: Integrating touch and sight. The subject tries to move a coin (small dark
circle) onto a tray with her own hand and with the help of a tool. In the figure on the
right, the integrated experience of vision and touch is transferred from the hand to
the tip of a tool. The dotted lines trace the subject’s gaze direction; the arrows
indicate the direction of the movement. The large white circle shows the area
where—according to the conscious model of reality—the sense of sight and the
sense of touch are integrated. Figure courtesy of Angelo Maravita.

space of action and your capabilities by using tools clearly seems to be
the ability to integrate them into a preexisting self-model. You can engage in goal-directed and intelligent tool use only if your brain temporarily represents the tools as part of your self. Intelligent tool use was
a major achievement in human evolution. One can plausibly assume
that some of the elementary building blocks of human tool-use abilities
existed in the brains of our ancestors, 25 million years ago. Then, due
to some not-yet-understood evolutionary pressure, they exploded into
what we see in humans today. The ﬂexibility in the monkey’s body
schema strongly relies on properties of body maps in its parietal lobe.
The decisive step in human evolution might well have been making a
larger part of the body model globally available—that is, accessible to
conscious experience. As soon as you can consciously experience a
tool as integrated into your bodily self, you can also attend to this
process, optimize it, form concepts about it, and control it in a more

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

80

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 80

THE EGO TUNNEL

ﬁne-grained manner—performing what today we call acts of will. Conscious self-experience clearly is a graded phenomenon; it increases in
strength as an organism becomes more and more sensitive to an internal context and expands its capacities for self-control.
Monkeys also seem able to incorporate into their bodily self-model a
visual image of their hand as displayed on a computer monitor. If an image of a snake or a spider approaches the image of the hand on the
screen, the animal retracts its real hand. Monkeys can even learn to control a brain-machine interface that lets them grasp objects with a robot
arm controlled by certain parts of their brain. Perhaps most exciting
from a philosophical perspective is the idea that all of this may have
contributed to the evolutionary emergence of a quasi-Cartesian “metaself,” the capacity to distance yourself from your bodily self—namely, by
beginning to see your own body as a tool.

Figure 4: Japanese macaques exhibit intelligent tool use. They can use a rake to reach a
food pellet (bottom), and they can monitor their own movements with the help of images
on a computer screen, even when their hands are invisible (middle and top): A mere
extension of behavioral space, or an extension of the phenomenal self-model? Figures
courtesy of Atsushi Iriki.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 81

Out of the Body and into the Mind

81

Clearly, the visual image of the robot arm, just as in the rubber-hand
illusion, is embedded in the dancing self-pattern in the macaque’s brain.
The integration of feedback from the robot arm into this self-model is
what allows the macaque to control the arm—to incorporate it functionally into a behavioral repertoire. In order to develop intelligent tool use,
the macaque ﬁrst had to embed this rake in its self-model; otherwise, it
could not have understood that it could use the rake as an extension of its
body. There is a link between selfhood and extending global control.
Human beings, too, treat virtual equivalents of their body parts as
seen on a video screen as extensions of their own bodies. Just think of
mouse pointers on computer desktops or controllable fantasy ﬁgures in
video games. This may explain the sense of “presence” we sometimes
have when playing these ultrarealistic games. Incorporation of artiﬁcial
actuators into widely distributed brain regions may someday allow human patients successfully to operate advanced prostheses (which, for
example, send information from touch and position sensors to a brainimplanted, multichannel recording device via a wireless link), while also
enjoying a robust conscious sense of ownership of such devices. All of
this gives us a deeper understanding of ownership. On higher levels,
ownership is not simply passive integration into a conscious self-model:
More often it has to do with functionally integrating something into a
feedback loop and then making it part of a control hierarchy. It now
looks as if even the evolution of language, culture, and abstract thought
might have been a process of “exaptation,” of using our body maps for
new challenges and purposes—a point to which I return in the chapter
on empathy and mirror neurons. Put simply, exaptation is a shift of
function for a certain trait in the process of evolution: Bird feathers are a
classic example, because initially these evolved “for” temperature regulation but later were adapted for ﬂight. Here, the idea is that having an
integrated bodily self-model was an extremely useful new trait because
it made a host of unexpected exaptations possible.
Clearly, a single general mechanism underlies the rubber-hand illusion, the evolution of eﬀortless tool use, the ability to experience bodily
presence in a virtual environment, and the ability to control artiﬁcial devices with one’s brain. This mechanism is the self-model, an integrated

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

82

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 82

THE EGO TUNNEL

representation of the organism as a whole in the brain. This representation is an ongoing process: It is ﬂexible, can be constantly updated, and
allows you to own parts of the world by integrating them into it. Its content is the content of the Ego.

THE OUT-OF-BODY EXPERIENCE
My own interest in consciousness arose from a variety of sources, which
were mostly academic but also autobiographical. At some points, the
theoretical problem appeared directly and unexpectedly in my life. As a
young man, I encountered a series of disturbing experiences, of which
the following is a typical instance:
It is spring, 1977. I am nineteen years old. I am lying in bed, on
my back, going to sleep, deeply relaxed yet still alert. The door is
half open, and light seeps in. I hear my family’s voices from the
hallway and the bathroom and pop music from my sister’s bedroom. Suddenly I feel as though my bed is sliding into a vertical
position, with the head of the bed moving toward the ceiling. I
seem to leave my physical body, rising slowly into an upright
position. I can still hear the voices, the sound of people brushing their teeth, and the music, but my sight is somewhat
blurred. I feel a mixture of amazement and rising panic, sensations that eventually lead to something like a faint, and I ﬁnd
myself back in bed, once again locked into my physical body.

This brief episode was startling for its clarity, its crisp and lucid quality, and the fact that from my point of view it appeared absolutely
real. Six years later, I was aware of the concept of the out-of-body experience (OBE), and when such episodes occurred, I could control at least
parts of the experience and attempt to make some veriﬁable observations. As I brieﬂy pointed out in the Introduction, OBEs are a wellknown class of states in which one undergoes the highly realistic illusion
of leaving one’s physical body, usually in the form of an etheric double,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 83

Out of the Body and into the Mind

83

Figure 5: Kinematics of the phenomenal body image during OBE onset: The “classical”
motion pattern according to S. Muldoon and H. Carrington, The Projection of the
Astral Body (London: Rider & Co., 1929).

and moving outside of it. Most OBEs occur spontaneously, during sleep
onset or surgical operations or following severe accidents. The classic
deﬁning characteristics include a visual representation of one’s body
from a perceptually impossible, third-person perspective (for example,
lying on the bed below) plus a second representation of one’s body, typically hovering above.
At about the same time, in the early 1980s, I underwent an equally
disturbing experience in my intellectual life. I was writing my philosophy dissertation at Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University on the discussion of the so-called mind-body problem that ensued after Gilbert
Ryle’s 1949 book, The Concept of Mind. In this period, various philosophers, from Ullin T. Place to Jaegwon Kim, had developed nearly a
dozen major theoretical proposals to solve that age-old puzzle, and
great progress had been made. I had grown up in a more traditionally
oriented philosophy department, which was dominated by the political
philosophy of the Frankfurt School. There, almost no one seemed
aware of the enormous progress in analytical philosophy of mind. To

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

84

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 84

THE EGO TUNNEL

my great surprise, I discovered that in the really convincing, substantial
work at the research frontier, materialism had long ago become the orthodoxy. Almost no one seemed even remotely to consider the possibility of the existence of a soul. There were very few dualists—except on
the Continent. It was sobering to realize that some forty years after the
end of World War II, with practically all of the German-Jewish intelligentsia and other intellectuals either murdered or driven into exile,
many lines of tradition and teacher-student relationships were severed,
and German philosophy had been largely decoupled from the global
context of discussion. Most German philosophers would not read what
was being published in English. Suddenly some of the philosophical debates I witnessed in German universities increasingly struck me as badly
informed, a bit provincial, and lacking awareness of where humankind’s
great project of constructing a comprehensive theory of mind actually
stood. I gradually became convinced, by my own reading, that indeed
there was no convincing empirical evidence of conscious experience
possibly taking place outside the brain, and that the general trend at the
frontier of the very best of philosophy of mind clearly pointed in the opposite direction. On the other hand, I had myself repeatedly experienced leaving my body—vividly and in a crystal-clear way. What to do?
There was only one answer: I had to turn these episodes into a controllable and repeatable state of consciousness, and I had to settle experimentally the issue of whether it was possible to make veriﬁable
observations in the out-of-body state. I read everything on OBEs I could
ﬁnd, and I tried various psychological techniques to produce the phenomenon deliberately. In a series of pitiless self-experiments, I stopped
drinking liquids at noon, stared at a glass of water by the kitchen sink
with the ﬁrm intention of returning to it in the out-of-body state, and
went to bed thirsty with half a tablespoon of salt in my cheek (you can
try this at home). In the scientiﬁc literature, I had read that OBEs were
associated with the anesthetic ketamine. So when I had to undergo minor surgery in 1985, I talked the anesthetist into changing the medication so that I could experience the wake-up phase of ketamine-induced
anesthesia in a medically controlled, experimental setting. (Do not try
this at home!) Both types of research projects failed, and I gave up on

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 85

Out of the Body and into the Mind

85

them many years ago. I was never able to go beyond pure ﬁrst-person
phenomenology—that is, to make a single veriﬁable observation in the
OBE state that could even remotely count as evidence for the genuine
separability of consciousness and the brain.
In some of my recent research, I have been trying to disentangle the
various layers of the conscious self-model—of the Ego. I ﬁrmly believe
that, from a theoretical perspective, it is most important ﬁrst to isolate
clearly the simplest form of self-consciousness. What is the most fundamental, the earliest sense of selfhood? Can we subtract thinking, feeling,
and autobiographical memory and still have an Ego? Can we remain in
the Now, perhaps even without any acts of will and in the absence of any
bodily behavior, and still enjoy phenomenal selfhood? Philosophers in
the past have made the mistake of almost exclusively discussing highlevel phenomena such as mastery of the ﬁrst-person pronoun “I” or cognitively mediated forms of intersubjectivity. I contend that we must pay
attention to the causally enabling and necessary low-level details ﬁrst, to
what I call “minimal phenomenal selfhood”; we must ground the self,
and we must do it in an interdisciplinary manner. As you will see, OBEs
are a perfect entry point.
Not too long ago, OBEs were something of a taboo zone for serious
researchers, just as consciousness was in the early 1980s; both have been
considered career-limiting moves by junior researchers. But after
decades of neglect, OBEs have now become one of the hottest topics in
research on embodiment and the conscious self. Olaf Blanke, whom we
met in the Introduction, and I are studying the experience of disembodiment in order to understand what an embodied self truly is.
From a philosophical perspective, OBEs are interesting for a number
of reasons. The phenomenology of OBEs inevitably leads to dualism and
to the idea of an invisible, weightless, but spatially extended second
body. I believe this may actually be the folk-phenomenological ancestor
of the notion of a “soul” and of the philosophical protoconcept of the
mind. The soul is the OBE-PSM. The traditional concept of an immortal soul that exists independently of the physical body probably has a recent neurophenomenological correlate. In its origins, the “soul” may
have been not a metaphysical notion but simply a phenomenological

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

86

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 86

THE EGO TUNNEL

one: the content of the phenomenal Ego activated by the human brain
during out-of-body experiences.
In the history of ideas, contemporary philosophical and scientiﬁc debates about the mind developed from this protoconcept—an animist,
quasi-sensory theory about what it means to have a mind. Having a mind
meant having a soul, an ethereal second body. This mythical idea of a
“subtle body” that is independent of the physical body and is the carrier
of higher mental functions, such as attention and cognition, is found in
many diﬀerent cultures and at many times—for instance, in prescientiﬁc
theories about a “breath of life.” Examples are the Hebrew ruach, the
Arabic ruh, the Latin spiritus, the Greek pneuma, and the Indian prana.
The subtle body is a spatially extended entity that was said to keep the
physical body alive and leave it after death.  It is also known in theosophy and in other spiritual traditions; for instance, as “the resurrection
body” and “the gloriﬁed body” in Christianity, “the most sacred body”
and “supracelestial body” in Suﬁsm, “the diamond body” in Taoism and
Vajrayana, “the light body” or “rainbow body” in Tibetan Buddhism.
My theory—the self-model theory of subjectivity—says that this subtle body does indeed exist, but it is not made of “angel stuﬀ ” or “astral
matter.” It is made of pure information, ﬂowing in the brain. Of course,
the “ﬂow of information” is just another metaphor, but the informationprocessing level of description is the best we have at this stage of research. It creates empirically testable hypotheses, and it allows us to
see things we could not see before. The subtle body is the brain’s selfmodel, and scientiﬁc research on the OBE shows this in a particularly
striking way.
First-person reports of OBEs are available in abundance, and they,
too, come from all times and many diﬀerent cultures. I propose that the
functional core of this kind of conscious experience is formed by a culturally invariant neuropsychological potential common to all human beings. Under certain conditions, the brains of all human beings can
generate OBEs. We are now beginning to understand the properties of
the functional and representational architecture involved. Examining
the phenomenology in OBE reports will help us to understand not only
these properties as such but also their neural implementation. There

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 87

Out of the Body and into the Mind

87

may well be a spatially distributed but functionally distinct neural correlate for the OBE state. In her work, the psychologist Susan J. Blackmore
has propounded a reductionist theory of out-of-body experiences, describing them as models of reality created by brains that are cut oﬀ from
sensory input during stressful situations and have to fall back on internal sources of information. She drew attention to the remarkable fact
that visual cognitive maps reconstructed from memory are most often
organized from a bird’s-eye perspective. Close your eyes and remember
the last time you were walking along the beach. Is your visual memory
one of looking out at the scene itself? Or is it of observing yourself, perhaps from somewhere above, walking along the coastline? For most
people, the latter is the case.
When I ﬁrst met Blackmore, in Tübingen in 1985, and told her about
several out-of-body experiences of my own, she kept asking me to describe, painstakingly, how I moved during these episodes. Not until then
did I realize that when I moved around my bedroom at night in the OBE
state, it was not in a smooth, continuous path, as in real-life walking or
as one might ﬂy in a dream. Instead, I moved in “jumps”—say, from one
window to the next. Blackmore has hypothesized that during OBEs we
move in discrete shifts, from one salient point in our cognitive map to
the next. The shifts take place in an internal model of our environment—a coarse-grained internal simulation of landmarks in settings
with which we are familiar. Her general idea is that the OBE is a conscious simulation of the world—spatially organized from a third-person
perspective and including a realistic representation of one’s own body—
and it is highly realistic because we do not recognize it as a simulation.
Blackmore’s theory is interesting because it treats OBEs as behavioral spaces. And why shouldn’t they be internally simulated behavioral
spaces? After all, conscious experience itself seems to be just that: an inner representation of a space in which perceptions are meaningfully integrated with one’s behavior. What I found most convincing about
Blackmore’s OBE model were the jumps from landmark to landmark, a
phenomenological feature I had overlooked in my own OBE episodes.
My ﬁfth OBE was particularly memorable. It took place at about 1:00
A .M., on October 31, 1983:

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

88

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 88

THE EGO TUNNEL
My vision was generally poor during OBE experiences, as would
be expected in a dark bedroom at night. When I realized I was
unable to ﬂip the light switch in front of which I found myself
standing in my OBE state, I became extremely nervous. In order
not to ruin everything and lose a precious opportunity for experiments, I decided to stay put until I had calmed down. Then
I attempted to walk to the open window, but instead found myself smoothly gliding there, arriving almost instantaneously. I
carefully touched the wooden frame, running my hands over it.
Tactile sensations were clear but diﬀerent—that is, the sensation
of relative warmth or cold was absent. I leaped through the window and went upward in a spiral. A further phenomenological
feature accompanied this experience—the compulsive urge to
visualize the headline in the local newspapers: “WAS IT ATTEMPTED SUICIDE OR AN EXTREME CASE OF SOMNAMBULISM? PHILOSOPHY STUDENT DROPS TO HIS DEATH AFTER SLEEPWALKING OUT
THE WINDOW.” A bit later, I was lying on top of my physical body

in bed again, from which I rose in a controlled fashion, for the
second time now. I tried to ﬂy to a friend’s house in Frankfurt,
eighty-ﬁve kilometers away, where I intended to try to make
some veriﬁable observations. Just by concentrating on my destination, I was torn forward at great speed, through the wall of
my bedroom, and immediately lost consciousness. As I came to,
half-locked into my physical body, I felt my clarity decreasing
and decided to exit my body one last time.

These incidents, taken from what was a more comprehensive experience, demonstrate a frequently overlooked characteristic of self-motion
in the OBE state—namely, that the body model does not move as the
physical body would, but that often merely thinking about a target location gets you there on a continuous trajectory. Vestibulo-motor sensations are strong in the OBE state (indeed, one fruitful way of looking at
OBEs is as complex vestibulo-motor hallucinations), but weight sensations are only weakly felt, and ﬂying seems to come naturally as the logical means of OBE locomotion. Because most OBEs happen at night,
another implicit assumption is that you cannot see very well. That is, if

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 89

Out of the Body and into the Mind

89

you are jumping from one landmark in your mental model of reality to
the next, it is not surprising that the space between two such salient
points is experientially vague or underdetermined; at least I simply
didn’t expect to see much detail. Note that the absence of thermal sensations and the short blackouts between diﬀerent scenes are also well documented in dream research (see chapter 5).
Here are some other ﬁrst-person accounts of OBEs. This one comes
from Swiss biochemist Ernst Waelti, who conducts research at the University of Bern’s Institute of Pathology on virosomes for drug delivery
and gene transfer:
I awoke at night—it must have been about 3 A .M.—and realized I
was unable to move. I was absolutely certain I was not dreaming, as I was enjoying full consciousness. Filled with fear about
my current condition, I had only one goal—namely, to be able to
move my body again. I concentrated all my will power and tried
to roll over onto my side: Something rolled, but not my body—
something that was me, my whole consciousness, including all
of its sensations. I rolled onto the ﬂoor beside the bed. While
this was happening, I did not feel bodiless but as if my body
consisted of a substance constituted of a mixture of gas and liquid. To this day, I have not forgotten the amazement that
gripped me when I felt myself falling to the ﬂoor, but the expected hard impact never came. Had my normal body fallen like
that, my head would have collided with the edge of my bedside
table. Lying on the ﬂoor, I was seized by panic. I knew I possessed a body, and I had only one overwhelming desire: to be
able to control it again. With a sudden jolt, I regained control of
it, without knowing how I managed to get back into it.

Again from Waelti, about another occasion:
In a dazed state, I went to bed at 11 P.M. and tried to fall asleep. I
was restless and turned over frequently, causing my wife to
grumble brieﬂy. Now I forced myself to lie in bed motionless.
For a while, I dozed, then felt the need to move my hands, which

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

90

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 90

THE EGO TUNNEL
were lying on the blanket, into a more comfortable position. In
the same instant, I realized that . . . my body was lying there in
some kind of paralysis. Simultaneously, I found I could pull my
hands out of my physical hands, as if the latter were just a stiﬀ
pair of gloves. The process of detachment started at the ﬁngertips, in a way that could be felt clearly, with a perceptible sound,
a kind of crackling. This was precisely the movement I had intended to carry out with my physical hands. With this, I detached from my body and ﬂoated out of it head ﬁrst, attaining
an upright position, as if I were almost weightless. Nevertheless,
I had a body, consisting of real limbs. You have certainly seen
how elegantly a jellyﬁsh moves through the water. I could now
move around with the same ease.
I lay down horizontally in the air and ﬂoated across the bed,
like a swimmer who has pushed himself oﬀ the edge of a swimming pool. A delightful feeling of liberation arose within me.
But soon I was seized by the ancient fear common to all living
creatures—the fear of losing my physical body. It suﬃced to
drive me back into my body.

Figure 6 a & b: How the conscious image of the body moves during OBE
onset. Two alternative but equally characteristic motion patterns as
described by Swiss biochemist Ernst Waelti (1983).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 91

Out of the Body and into the Mind

91

As noted, the sleep paralysis Waelti describes is not a necessary condition for OBEs. They frequently occur following accidents, in combat
situations, or during extreme sports—for instance in high-altitude
climbers or marathon runners:
A Scottish woman wrote that, when she was 32 years old, she had
an OBE while training for a marathon. “After running approximately 12–13 miles . . . I started to feel as if I wasn’t looking
through my eyes but from somewhere else. . . . I felt as if something was leaving my body, and although I was still running
along looking at the scenery, I was looking at myself running as
well. My ‘soul’ or whatever, was ﬂoating somewhere above my
body high enough up to see the tops of the trees and the small
hills.”

Various studies show that between 8 and 15 percent of people in the
general population have had at least one OBE. There are much higher
incidences in certain groups of people, such as students (25 percent),
paranormal believers (49 percent), and schizophrenics (42 percent);
there are also OBEs of neurological origin, as in epileptics.
A 29-year-old woman has had absence seizures since the age of
12 years. The seizures occur ﬁve times a week without warning.
They consist of a blank stare and brief interruption of ongoing
behavior, sometimes with blinking. She had an autoscopic experience at age 19 years during the only generalized tonoclonic
seizure she has ever had. While working in a department store
she suddenly fell, and she said, “The next thing I knew I was
ﬂoating just below the ceiling. I could see myself lying there. I
wasn’t scared; it was too interesting. I saw myself jerking and
overheard my boss telling someone to ‘punch the timecard out’
and that she was going with me to the hospital. Next thing, I was
in space and could see Earth. I felt a hand on my left shoulder,
and when I went to turn around, I couldn’t. Then I looked down
and I had no legs; I just saw stars. I stayed there for a while until
some inner voice told me to go back to the body. I didn’t want to

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

92

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 92

THE EGO TUNNEL
go because it was gorgeous up there, it was warm—not like
heat, but security. Next thing, I woke up in the emergency
room.” No abnormalities were found on the neurological examination. Skull CT scan was normal. The EEG demonstrated generalized bursts of 3/s spike-and-wave discharges. 

At ﬁrst, the realistic quality of these OBEs seems to argue against
their hallucinatory nature. More interesting, though, is how veridical elements and hallucination are integrated into a single whole. Often, the
appearance/reality distinction is available: There is insight, but this insight is only partial. One epileptic patient noted that his body, perceived
from an external perspective, was dressed in the clothes he was really
wearing, but, curiously, his hair was combed, though he knew it had
been uncombed before the onset of the episode. Some epileptic patients
report that their hovering body casts a shadow; others do not report
seeing the shadow. For some, the double is slightly smaller than life-size.
We can also see the insight component in the ﬁrst report by Ernst
Waelti previously quoted: “Had my normal body fallen like that, my
head would have collided with the edge of my bedside table.”
Another reason the OBE is interesting from a philosophical perspective is that it is the best known state of consciousness in which two selfmodels are active at the same time. To be sure, only one of them is the
“locus of identity,” the place where the agent (in philosophy, an entity
that acts) resides. The other self-model—that of the physical body lying,
say, on the bed below—is not, strictly speaking, a self-model, because it
does not function as the origin of the ﬁrst-person perspective. This second self-model is not a subject model. It is not the place from which you
direct your attention. On the other hand, it is still your own body that
you are looking at. You recognize it as your own, but now it is not the
body as subject, as the locus of knowledge, agency, and conscious experience. That is exactly what the Ego is. These observations are interesting because they allow us to distinguish diﬀerent functional layers in the
conscious human self.
Interestingly, there is a range of phenomena of autoscopy (that is, the
experience of viewing your body from a distance) that are probably
functionally related to OBEs, and they are of great conceptual interest.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 93

Out of the Body and into the Mind

93

The four main types are autoscopic hallucination, heautoscopy, out-ofbody experience, and the “feeling of a presence.” In autoscopic hallucinations and heautoscopy, patients see their own body outside, but they
do not identify with it and don’t have the feeling that they are “in” this illusory body. However, in heautoscopy, things may sometimes go back
and forth, and the patient doesn’t know which body he is in right now.
The shift in the visuospatial ﬁrst-person perspective, localization, and
identiﬁcation of the self with an illusory body at an extracorporeal position are complete in out-of-body experiences. Here the self and the
visuospatial ﬁrst-person perspective are localized outside one’s body,
and people see their physical body from this disembodied location. The
“feeling of a presence”—which has also been caused by directly stimulating the brain with an electrode—is particularly interesting: It is not a visual own-body illusion but an illusion during which a second illusory
body is only felt (but not seen).

Figure 7: Disturbances of the self and underlying brain areas. All these
phenomena show that not only identification with and localization of
body parts but also the conscious representation of the entire body and
the associated sense of selfhood can be disturbed. All four types of
experience are caused by multisensory disintegration having a clear-cut
neurological basis (see light areas); brain tumors and epilepsy are among
the most frequent causes for heautoscopy. Modified from O. Blanke;
Illusions visuelles. In A.B. Safran, A. Vighetto, T. Landis, E. Cabanis (eds.),
Neurophtalmologie (Paris: Madden, 2004), 147–150.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

94

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 94

THE EGO TUNNEL

What about personality correlates? Diﬀerential psychology has
shown that signiﬁcant personality traits of people who frequently experience OBEs include openness to new experience, neuroticism, a tendency toward depersonalization (an emotional disorder in which there
is loss of contact with one’s own personal reality, accompanied by feelings of unreality and strangeness; often people feel that their body is unreal, changing, or dissolving), schizotypy (suﬀerers experience distorted
thinking, behave strangely, typically have few, if any, close friends, and
feel nervous around strangers), borderline personality disorder, and
histrionics. Another recent study links OBEs to a capacity for strong absorption—that is, experiencing the phenomenal world, in all its aspects
and with all one’s senses, in a manner that totally engages one’s attention
and interest—and somatoform dissociation (in part, a tendency to cut
one’s attention oﬀ from bodily and motion stimuli), and points out that
such experiences should not automatically be construed as pathological.
It is also interesting to take a closer look at the phenomenology of
OBEs. For example, the “head exit” depicted in ﬁgure 6a is found in only
12.5 percent of cases. The act of leaving your body is abrupt in 46.9 percent of cases but can also vary from slow (21.9 percent) to gradual and
very slow (15.6 percent). Many OBEs are short, and one recent study
found a duration of less than ﬁve minutes in nearly 40 percent of cases
and less than half a minute in almost 10 percent. In a little more than
half the cases, the subjects “see” their body from an external perspective,
and 62 percent do so from a short distance only. Many OBEs involve
only a passive sense of ﬂoating in a body image, though the sense of selfhood is robust. In a recent study more than half the subjects reported
being unable to control their movements, whereas nearly a third could.
Others experienced no motion at all. Depending on the study, 31 to 84
percent of subjects ﬁnd themselves located in a second body (but this
may also be an indeﬁnite spatial volume), and about 31 percent of OBEs
are actually “asomatic”—they are experienced as bodiless and include an
externalized visuospatial perspective only. Vision is the dominant sensory modality in 68.8 percent, hearing in 15.5 percent. An older study
found the content of the visual scene to be realistic (i.e., not supernatural) in more than 80 percent of cases.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 95

Out of the Body and into the Mind

95

I have always believed that OBEs are important for any solid, empirically grounded theory of self-consciousness. But I had given up on them
long ago; there was just too little substantial research, not enough
progress over decades, and most of the books on OBEs merely seemed
to push metaphysical agendas and ideologies. This changed in 2002,
when Olaf Blanke and his colleagues, while doing clinical work at the
Laboratory of Presurgical Epilepsy Evaluation of the University Hospital
of Geneva, repeatedly induced OBEs and similar experiences by electrically stimulating the brain of a patient with drug-resistant epilepsy, a
forty-three-year-old woman who had been suﬀering from seizures for
eleven years. Because it was not possible to ﬁnd any lesions using neuroimaging methods, invasive monitoring had to be undertaken to locate
the seizure focus precisely. During the stimulation of the brain’s right
angular gyrus, the patient suddenly reported something strongly resembling an OBE. The epileptic focus was located more than 5 cm from the
stimulation site in the medial temporal lobe. Electrical stimulation of
this site did not induce OBEs, and OBEs were also not part of the patient’s habitual seizures.
Initial stimulations induced feelings that
the patient described as “sinking into the bed”
or “falling from a height.” Increasing the current amplitude to 3.5 milliamperes led her to
report, “I see myself lying in bed, from above,
but I see only my legs and lower trunk.” Further stimulations also induced an instantaneous feeling of “lightness” and of “ﬂoating”
Figure 8 shows the electrode
about six feet above the bed. Often she felt as site on the right angular gyrus,
though she were just below the ceiling and where electrical stimulation
repeatedly induced not only
legless.
OBEs but also the feeling of
Meanwhile, not only OBEs but also the transformed arms and legs or
“feeling of a presence” have been caused by di- whole-body displacements.
Reprinted by permission from
rect electrical brain stimulation (see ﬁgure 9).
Macmillan Publishers Ltd:
Blanke’s ﬁrst tentative hypothesis was that Nature, Volume 419, 19,
out-of-body experiences, at least in these cases, September 2002.
resulted from a failure to integrate complex

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

96

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 96

THE EGO TUNNEL

Figure 9: A recent study conducted by Dr. Olaf Blanke provides new scientific insight
into experiences more often left to paranormal explanations. Stimulating a part of the
brain called the angular gyrus on opposing sides yielded two distinct results: the feeling
of a bodily presence behind oneself and an OBE. (Source: Dr. Olaf Blanke. Figure from
Graham Roberts/The New York Times.)

somatosensory and vestibular information. In more recent studies, he
and his colleagues localized the relevant brain lesion or dysfunction at
the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ). They argue that two separate
pathological conditions may have to come together to cause an OBE.
The ﬁrst is disintegration on the level of the self-model, brought about
by a failure to bind proprioceptive, tactile, and visual information about
one’s body. The second is conﬂict between external, visual space and the
internal frame of reference created by vestibular information, i.e., our
sense of balance. We all move within an internal frame of reference created by our vestibular organs. In vertigo or dizziness, for example, we
have problems with vestibular information while experiencing the dominant external, visual space. If the spatial frame of reference created by
our sense of balance and the one created by vision come apart, the result
could well be the conscious experience of seeing one’s body in a position
that does not coincide with its felt position.
It is now conceivable that some OBEs could be caused by a cerebral
dysfunction at the TPJ. In epileptic patients who report experiencing
OBEs, a signiﬁcant activation at the TPJ can be observed when elec-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 97

Out of the Body and into the Mind

97

trodes are implanted in the left hemisphere. Interestingly, when
healthy subjects are asked to imagine their bodies being in a certain position, as if they were seeing themselves from a characteristic perspective of the OBE, the same brain region is activated in less than half a
second. If this brain region is inhibited by a procedure called transcranial magnetic stimulation, this transformation of the mental model of
one’s body is impaired. Finally, when an epileptic patient whose OBEs
were caused by damage to the temporo-parietal junction was asked to
simulate mentally an OBE self-model, this led to a partial activation of
the seizure focus. Taken together, these observations point to an
anatomical link among three diﬀerent but highly similar types of conscious experiences: real, seizure-caused OBEs; intended mental simulations of OBEs in healthy subjects; and intended mental simulations of
OBEs in epileptic patients.
Recent ﬁndings show that the phenomenal experience of disembodiment depends not just on the right half of the temporo-parietal junction
but also on an area in the left half, called the extrastriate body-area. A
number of diﬀerent brain regions may actually contribute to the experience. Indeed, the OBE may turn out not to be one single and uniﬁed target phenomenon. For example, the phenomenology of exiting the body
varies greatly across diﬀerent types of reports: The initial seconds clearly
seem to diﬀer between spontaneous OBEs in healthy subjects and those
experienced by the clinical population, such as epileptic patients. The

Figure 10: Brain areas that are active in mental transformations of one’s body,
predominantly at the right temporo-parietal junction. (Figure courtesy of Olaf
Blanke, from Blanke et al., “Linking Out-of-Body Experience and SelfProcessing to Mental Own-Body Imagery and the Temporoparietal Junction,”
Jour. Neurosci. 25:550–557, 2005.)

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

98

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 98

THE EGO TUNNEL

onset may also be diﬀerent in followers of certain spiritual practices.
Moreover, there could be a considerable neurophenomenological overlap between lucid dreams (see chapter 5) and OBEs as well as body illusions in general.

VIRTUA L OUT-OF-BODY EXPERIENCES
In 2005, Olaf, his PhD student Bigna Lenggenhager, and I embarked on
a series of virtual-reality experiments. Our ﬁrst goal was to turn the
OBE into a fully replicable phenomenon in healthy subjects. Proper research required that we be able to investigate and repeat out-of-body experiences in the lab. The guiding question was whether there could be
an integrated kind of bodily self-consciousness that is a phenomenal
confabulation. In short, could one experience a hallucinated and a bodily self at the same time, a full-body analog of the rubber-hand illusion?
Here is an example of one of our early experimental protocols using
the paraphernalia of virtual reality: a head-mounted display (HMD)
consisting of goggles that showed two separate images to each eye, creating the three-dimensional illusion of being in a virtual room. Subjects
were able to see their own backs,
which were ﬁlmed from a distance of
2 meters and projected into the threedimensional space in front of them
with the help of a 3D-encoder. When I
acted as the subject of the experiment, I felt as if I had been transposed
into a 3D-version of René Magritte’s
painting La reproduction interdite.
Suddenly I saw myself from the back,
standing in front of me.
While I was looking at my own
back as seen in the head-mounted display, Bigna Lenggenhager was stroking
Figure 11: Magritte’s La Reproduction
my back, while the camera was
Interdite (1937)
recording this action. As I watched my

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 99

99

Figure 12: Creating a whole-body analog of the rubber-hand illusion. (A) Participant
(darker trousers) sees through a HMD his own virtual body (lighter-colored trousers) in
3D, standing 2 m in front of him and being stroked synchronously or asynchronously
at the participant’s back. In other conditions, the participant sees either (B) a virtual
fake body (lighter trousers) or (C) a virtual noncorporeal object (light gray) being
stroked synchronously or asynchronously at the back. Dark colors indicate the actual
location of the physical body or object, whereas light colors represent the virtual
body or object seen on the HMD. Illustration by M. Boyer.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

100

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 100

THE EGO TUNNEL

own back being stroked, I immediately had an awkward feeling: I felt
subtly drawn toward my virtual body in front of me, and I tried to “slip
into” it. This was as far as things went.
Our studies became more systematic. All of our subjects would be
shown their own backs being stroked (this was the “own-body condition”) and in a subsequent test would be shown either the back of a
mannequin (the “fake-body condition”) or a large rectangular slab
(which didn’t look like a body at all, the “object condition”) being
stroked. An additional condition was the degree of synchronicity between the seen and the felt stroking, which could be varied by projecting
the camera image into cyberspace with a certain time lag.
Afterwards, an independent measure for the strength of the illusion
was introduced. They were blindfolded, moved around and disoriented,
as in a game of blindman’s buﬀ, and then asked to return to their initial
position.
At the end of the experiment, the subjects were asked to ﬁll out a
questionnaire about their experiences. Results showed that for the synchronous conditions in which they were observing either their own
body or a mannequin, they often felt as though the virtual ﬁgure was
their own body, actually identifying with and “jumping into” it. This impression was less likely to occur in the case of the wooden slab, as well as
in all of the asynchronous conditions. The synchronous experiments
also showed a signiﬁcantly larger shift by the subjects toward the projected real or fake body than did the asynchronous control conditions.
In other control conditions, subjects observed a screen without a body
in it and were then displaced (visual scene), or were simply displaced
only. These data suggest that locating the “self ” in the case of conﬂicting
visual and somatosensory input is as prone to error as was reported for
a body part in the rubber-hand illusion.
Here is what I call the “embedding principle”: The bodily self is phenomenally represented as inhabiting a volume in space, whereas the seeing self is an extensionless point—namely, the center of projection for our
visuospatial perspective, the geometrical origin of our perspectival visual
model of reality. Normally this point of origin (behind the eyes, as if a little
person were looking out of them as one looks out a window) is within the
volume deﬁned by the felt bodily self. Yet, as our experiments demon-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 101

Out of the Body and into the Mind

101

strated, seeing and bodily self can be separated, and the fundamental
sense of selfhood is found at the location of the visual body representation.

THE ESSENCE OF SELFHOOD
Why is all this information important for the philosophy of the conscious
self? Can it really help us to ﬁnd the conceptual essence of selfhood, to
pinpoint what all self-conscious beings in the universe have in common?
Is it really a step toward the big picture mentioned in the Introduction?
The answer is yes: What we really want are the constitutive conditions
for selfhood. We want to know what is truly necessary and what is perhaps only suﬃcient to bring about an Ego, the fundamental feeling of
“being someone.” For example, in our quest for the core of the conscious
self, it would be progress if one could diﬀerentiate between what is
merely causally enabling, and what is strictly necessary under the laws of
nature holding in this universe. Our experiments demonstrate that
agency is not necessary, because they selectively manipulate only two dimensions: self-identiﬁcation (with the content of a conscious body image) and self-localization (in a spatial frame of reference). They do so
with the subject in a passive condition, without will or bodily agency.
This shows how the target phenomenon—self-consciousness—can be
causally controlled by multisensory conﬂict alone. That is important because if we combine the discovery that this can be achieved simply by creating a conﬂict between sight and touch with the fact that the shift in
visual perspective during OBEs can also be caused by an epileptic seizure
or by direct stimulation with an electrode in the brain, we get a much better idea of what the simplest form of self-consciousness might be. It must
be something very local, something in the brain itself, and it is independent of motor control, of moving your body.
We know more: A seeing self also is not necessary. You can shut the
windows in front of the little man behind your eyes by closing your
eyelids. The seeing self disappears; the Ego remains. You can be a robust, conscious self even if you are emotionally ﬂat, if you do not engage in acts of will, and also in the absence of thought. Emotions, will,
and thoughts are not necessary to the fundamental sense of selfhood.
Every meditator (remember chapter 1) can conﬁrm that you may settle

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

102

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 102

THE EGO TUNNEL

into a calm, emotionally neutral state, deeply relaxed and widely alert,
a state of pure observation, without any thought, while a certain elementary form of bodily self-consciousness remains. Let us call this
“selfhood-as-embodiment.”
So what is the essence? Location in space and time plus a transparent
body image seem to be very close. The rubber-hand illusion manipulates only the experience of ownership of body parts. The full-body illusion manipulates ownership of the body as a whole. Could this ﬁnally be
the simplest form of selfhood, something we could metaphorically describe as the fundamental experience of “global ownership”? This, I believe, is a misleading idea. Global ownership is a dangerous concept,
because it introduces two distinct entities plus a relation, the body and
an invisible self, someone who possesses the body. It is the body that
possesses itself: Owning something means to be able to control it, and
selfhood is intimately related to the very moment in which the body discovers that it can control itself—as a whole. It is exactly what happens
when you wake up in the morning, when you “come to yourself.”
Here is an interim theory: Minimal self-consciousness is not control, but what makes control possible. It includes an image of the body in
time and space (location) plus the fact that the organism creating this
image does not recognize it as an image (identiﬁcation). So we must
have a Now, plus a spatial frame of reference, and a transparent bodymodel. Then we need a visual (or auditory) perspective originating
within the body volume, a center of projection embedded in the volume of the body. But the really interesting step is the one from the minimal self to a slightly more robust ﬁrst-person perspective. It is the step
from selfhood-as-embodiment to selfhood-as-subjectivity.
The decisive transition takes place when the system is already given
to itself through minimal self-consciousness and then, in addition, represents itself as being directed toward an object. I believe this happens
exactly when we ﬁrst discover that we can control the focus of attention.
We understand that we can draw things from the fringe of consciousness into the center of experience, holding them in the spotlight of attention or deliberately ignoring them—that we can actively control what
information appears in our mind. Now we have a perspective, because

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 103

Out of the Body and into the Mind

103

we have an inner image of ourselves as actually representing, as subjects
directed at the world. Now we can, for the ﬁrst time, also attend to our
own body as a whole—we become self-directed. Inwardness appears.
The essence of this slightly stronger form of selfhood—what a philosopher might call its “representational content”—is attentional agency
plus the realization that the body is now available for global control. It is
inner knowledge, not of ongoing motor behavior or of perceptual and
attentional processing directed at the world or single body parts, but of
the body as a single multisensory whole, which now becomes functionally available for global control. Conscious selfhood is a deep-seated
form of knowledge about oneself, providing information about new
causal properties. This inner knowledge has nothing to do with language or concepts. An animal could have it.
What exactly is this “coming to”? Here is another lesson to be learned
from the careful study of OBEs: Some OBErs act, but others have a passive experience of ﬂoating in a body image; often the second body is not
even available for conscious control, yet the sense of selfhood is robust.
In a recent study, 53.1 percent of subjects reported not being able to
control their own movements (whereas 28.1 percent did, and others
didn’t experience motion at all). So it clearly is the more subtle experience of controlling the focus of attention, which seems to be at the heart
of inwardness—selfhood-as-subjectivity is intimately related to “modeling mental resource allocation” as some sober computational neuroscientist might say. The correct philosophical term would be “epistemic
control”: The mental action of expanding your knowledge about the
world, for example, by selecting what you will know, while at the same
time excluding what you will, for now, ignore. What this adds is a strong
ﬁrst-person perspective, the experience of being directed at an object.
Subjective awareness in this sense of having a perspective by being directed at the world is body image (in space and time) plus the experience of attentional control; inwardness appears when we attend to the
body itself. Recall how, in chapter 2, I said that consciousness is the
space of attentional agency. Selfhood as inwardness emerges when an
organism for the ﬁrst time actively attends to its body as a whole. If a
global model of the body is integrated into the space of attentional

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

104

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 104

THE EGO TUNNEL

agency, a richer phenomenal self emerges. It is not necessary to think, it
is not necessary to move; the availability of the body as a whole for focal
attention is enough to create the most fundamental sense of selfhoodas-inwardness—that is, the ability to become actively self-directed in attention. The body model now becomes a self-model in a philosophically
more interesting sense: The organism is now potentially directed at the
world and at itself at the same time. It is the body as subject.
But again—who controls the focus of attention? In our Video Ergo
Sum study, who is the entity misidentifying itself? Might we nevertheless
have a soul, or some sort of astral body, that could survive even bodily
death and experience some kind of illusory reincarnation? Will we soon
achieve artiﬁcial immortality by entering into software worlds designed
by human beings, through advanced Magritte-style “forbidden reproduction,” deliberately identifying ourselves with virtual bodies and virtual
persons we have created for ourselves? Is the phenomenal world itself,
perhaps, just virtual reality?

WE LIVE IN A VIRTUA L WORLD
The history of philosophy has shown that technological metaphors have
considerable limitations; nevertheless, virtual reality is a useful one. Nature’s virtual reality is conscious experience—a real-time world-model
that can be viewed as a permanently running online simulation, allowing organisms to act and interact.
Millions of years ago, nature’s virtual reality achieved what today’s
software engineers still strive for: the phenomenal properties of “presence” and “full immersion.” From an engineering point of view, the
problems involved in creating successful virtual environments are problems of advanced interface design. A virtual interface is a system of
transducers, signal processors, hardware, and software. It creates an interactive medium that conveys information to the user’s senses while
constantly monitoring the user’s behavior and employing it to update
and manipulate the virtual environment.
Conscious experience, too, is an interface, an invisible, perfect internal medium allowing an organism to interact ﬂexibly with itself. It is a

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 105

Out of the Body and into the Mind

105

control device. It functions by creating an internal user interface—an “as
if ” (that is, virtual) reality. It ﬁlters information, has a high bandwidth, is
unambiguous and reliable, and generates a sense of presence. More important, it also generates a sense of self. The self-model is much like the
mouse pointer on the virtual desktop of your PC—or the little red arrow
on the subway map that advises “You are here.” It places you at the center of a behavioral space, of your consciously experienced world-model,
your inner virtual reality.
The Ego is a special part of this virtual reality. By generating an internal image of the organism as a whole, it allows the organism to appropriate its own hardware. It is evolution’s answer to the need for
explaining one’s inner and outer actions to oneself, predicting one’s behavior, and monitoring critical system properties. Finally, it allows the
system to depict internally the history of its actions as its own history.
(Autobiographical memory, of course, is one of the most important layers of the human self-model, enabling us to appropriate our own history,
inside-time and outside-time, the Now and the past.) Consciousness
gives you ﬂexibility, and global control gives you the Ego. On the level of
conscious experience, this process of functionally appropriating one’s
hardware—one’s body—in a holistic fashion is mirrored as the sense of
global ownership, or minimal selfhood.
Nature, it seems, was engaged in advanced interface design long before
we were. It is interesting to note that the best theorists researching virtual
environments today not only employ philosophical notions such as “presence” or “situatedness” but also talk about the “virtual body.” For them, a
virtual body is part of an extended virtual environment. It is a tool that
functions much like the little red arrow or the mouse pointer. If the virtual
body is employed as an interface, it can even be used to control a robot at
a distance. The related concept of a “slave robot” is particularly interesting. To achieve such telepresence, there must be a high correlation between the human operator’s movements and the actions of the slave
robot. (Recall the monkey controlling the robot arm? Now monkeys can
even remote-control the real-time walking patterns of humanoid robots
halfway around the world, from Duke University in America to the Computational Brain Project of the Japan Science and Technology Agency in

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

106

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 106

THE EGO TUNNEL

Japan, and through a recording of their brain activity only. As Professor
Miguel Nicolelis reports, “The most stunning ﬁnding is that when we
stopped the treadmill and the monkey ceased to move its legs, it was able
to sustain the locomotion of the robot for a few minutes—just by thinking—using only the visual feedback of the robot in Japan.”)
Ideally, a human operator would identify his or her own body with
that of the slave robot, achieving this with the help of the virtual body,
which functions as an interface. Again, nature did just that millions of
years ago: Like a virtual body, the phenomenal self-model is an advanced interface designed to appropriate and control a body. Whereas
in the case of the virtual body, the slave robot may be thousands of miles
away, in the case of the Ego, the target system and the simulating system
are identical: The conscious experience of being a subject arises when a
single organism learns to enslave itself.
The emergence of an Ego Tunnel created a much more eﬃcient way
of controlling one’s body. Controlling one’s body meant controlling
one’s behavior and one’s perceptual machinery. But it also meant directing one’s thoughts and regulating one’s emotional states. The integrated
conscious self-model is a special region of the high-dimensional user interface that emerged in our brains. It is a particularly user-friendly interface, allowing a biological organism to direct its attention to a critical
subset of its own global properties. Having a self-model is like adaptive
user-modeling, except that it is self-directed and taking place internally.
In an important sense, the resulting Ego is a ﬁction; however, it is also a
wonderfully eﬃcient control device. You could also say that it is an entirely new window on reality.
I claim that phenomenal ﬁrst-person experience and the emergence
of a conscious self are complex forms of virtual reality. A virtual reality is
a possible reality. As anyone who has worn a head-mounted display or
played modern video games knows, we can sometimes forget the “as if ”
completely—the possible can be experienced as the real. In a way, the
conscious parts of our brains are like the body’s head-mounted display:
They immerse the organisms in a simulated behavioral space.
Together, the embodied brain and the PSM, the phenomenal selfmodel, work much like a total ﬂight simulator. Before we get to the little

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 107

Out of the Body and into the Mind

107

word “total,” let’s look at why a ﬂight simulator is a good metaphor for
the way our consciousness works. A ﬂight simulator is, of course, a
training device that helps pilots learn to control an airplane successfully.
To achieve this, the simulation must be as accurate as possible in integrating two diﬀerent sources of sensory information: vision and the proprioceptive sense of balance. During a simulated takeoﬀ, for example,
the pilot not only has to see the runway, but he also has to feel the acceleration of the “as if ” plane—and in relation to his own body.
Advanced ﬂight simulators have replaced the movable cockpit mockup and computer screen with a head-mounted display; two slightly displaced monitors create three-dimensional surround graphics. A special
programming technique called inﬁnity optics allows the pilot to look at
remote objects “through the windows” of the cockpit, even though the
computer-generated images are only a few inches from his face. The
mock-up’s movable platform has been replaced with seat shakers that
simulate a range of realistic kinesthetic sensations, such as acceleration
or turbulence. Moreover, so the pilot can learn to use on-board instruments and get to know how the aircraft will react to diﬀerent operations, the simulations of visual and kinesthetic input are constantly
updated at great speed and with maximum accuracy.
The human brain can be compared to a modern ﬂight simulator in
several respects. Like a ﬂight simulator, it constructs and continuously
updates an internal model of external reality by using a continuous
stream of input supplied by the sensory organs and employing past experience as a ﬁlter. It integrates sensory-input channels into a global
model of reality, and it does so in real time. However, there is a diﬀerence. The global model of reality constructed by our brain is updated at
such great speed and with such reliability that we generally do not experience it as a model. For us, phenomenal reality is not a simulational
space constructed by our brains; in a direct and experientially untranscendable manner, it is the world we live in. Its virtuality is hidden,
whereas a ﬂight simulator is easily recognized as a ﬂight simulator—its
images always seem artiﬁcial. This is so because our brains continuously
supply us with a much better reference model of the world than does the
computer controlling the ﬂight simulator. The images generated by our

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

108

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 108

THE EGO TUNNEL

visual cortex are updated much faster and more accurately than the images appearing in a head-mounted display. The same is true for our proprioceptive and kinesthetic perceptions; the movements generated by a
seat shaker can never be as accurate and as rich in detail as our own sensory perceptions.
Finally, the brain also diﬀers from a ﬂight simulator in that there is no
user, no pilot who controls it. The brain is like a total ﬂight simulator, a
self-modeling airplane that, rather than being ﬂown by a pilot, generates
a complex internal image of itself within its own internal ﬂight simulator. The image is transparent and thus cannot be recognized as an image
by the system. Operating under the condition of a naive-realistic selfmisunderstanding, the system interprets the control element in this image as a nonphysical object: The “pilot” is born into a virtual reality with
no opportunity to discover this fact. The pilot is the Ego. The total ﬂight
simulator generates an Ego Tunnel but is completely lost in it.
If the virtual self functions extremely well, the organism using it is
completely unaware of its “as if ” nature. The self-model activated in the
human brain has been optimized over millions of years. The process
that constructs it is fast, reliable, and has a much higher resolution than
any of today’s virtual-reality games. As a result, the virtuality of the phenomenal self-model tends to be invisible to its user. But strictly speaking, it is simply the best hypothesis the system has about its own current
state—presented in a new, highly integrated data format. To illustrate
this point, let’s look at a classic experiment in modern neuropsychology.

PHA NTOM LIMBS
Following amputation, many patients experience a so-called phantom
limb at some point—the persistent and unmistakable impression that
the lost limb is still present, still part of their body. These phantom
limbs feel somewhat less real than the rest of the body, a bit “ghostly.”
Silas Weir Mitchell, the American neurologist who introduced the concept of phantom limbs in 1871, spoke of “ghostly members” haunting
people like “unseen ghosts of the lost part.” Often, the phantom recedes gradually and ﬁnally disappears; in some cases, however, phantom

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 109

Out of the Body and into the Mind

109

limbs can persist for months or even years. Patients often have painful
sensations in their phantom limb. Sometimes, as in the now-classic case
soon to be described, the phantom is “paralyzed,” creating the subjective
impression that the absent limb is frozen in a ﬁxed position and cannot
be moved.
In a set of experiments involving a patient with a paralyzed phantom
limb, V. S. Ramachandran and his UCSD colleagues demonstrated the
virtuality of the bodily self-model. They constructed a “virtual-reality
box” to show to what extent the content of the self-model depends on
perceptual-context information. Their idea was that by manipulating
the perceptual-context information—which in turn constrains the information-processing activity in the brain—the content of the bodily selfmodel can be changed.
Their virtual-reality box was quite simple. A mirror was placed vertically inside a cardboard box open at the top, and two holes were cut in
the front of the box, to either side of the mirror. The experimenters
asked Philip, a patient who had been suﬀering from a paralyzed phantom limb for many years, to insert both of his arms—that is, his right
arm and his left “phantom arm”—through the holes in the box. Then he
was told to observe the reﬂection of his real hand in the mirror. The
mirror image of his right hand was used to create the visual illusion that
he did actually have two hands. Next, he was asked to make symmetrical
movements with both his real arm and his phantom arm.
What would happen to the content of Philip’s self-model if the imagined movements of his phantom arm were simultaneously matched with
visual input? What would happen to his paralyzed phantom if he could
see the movements of a hand in the mirror? Ramachandran described
the outcome:
I asked Philip to place his right hand on the right side of the
mirror in the box and imagine that his left hand (the phantom)
was on the left side. “I want you to move your right and left arm
simultaneously,” I instructed.
“Oh, I can’t do that,” said Philip. “I can move my right arm,
but my left arm is frozen. Every morning when I get up, I try to

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

110

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 110

THE EGO TUNNEL
move my phantom because it’s in this funny position and I feel
that moving it might help relieve the pain. But,” he said, looking
down at his invisible arm, “I never have been able to generate a
ﬂicker of movement in it.”
“Okay, Philip, but try anyway.”
Philip rotated his body, shifting his shoulder, to “insert” his
lifeless phantom into the box. Then he put his right hand on the
other side of the mirror and attempted to make synchronous
movements. As he gazed into the mirror, he gasped and then
cried out, “Oh, my God! Oh, my God, doctor! This is unbelievable. It’s mind-boggling!” He was jumping up and down like a
kid. “My left arm is plugged in again. It’s as if I’m in the past. All
these memories from years ago are ﬂooding back into my mind.
I can move my arm again. I can feel my elbow moving, my wrist
moving. It’s all moving again.”
After he calmed down a little I said, “Okay, Philip, now close
your eyes.”

Figure 13: Mirror-induced synesthesia. Making part of a hallucinated self available for
conscious action control by installing a virtual source of visual feedback. Picture
courtesy of V. S. Ramachandran.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 111

Out of the Body and into the Mind

111

“Oh, my,” he said, clearly disappointed. “It’s frozen again. I
feel my right hand moving, but there’s no movement in the
phantom.”
“Open your eyes.”
“Oh, yes. Now it’s moving again.”

The phantom movement in this experiment is the content of the conscious self-model. In the real world, there is no limb that can be felt or
controlled. In his moving phantom limb, Philip experiences—and controls—a part of his bodily self that does not exist. Just as in the rubberhand illusion, the experiential property of ownership seamlessly spreads
into the hallucinated part of the bodily self: The moving phantom limb
is owned, just as the rubber hand is owned. On the intellectual level,
Philip understands perfectly well that the phantom limb does not exist.
(This fact is cognitively available to him, as a philosopher might say.)
But the subjective experience of his phantom arm actually moving is robust and realistic. And, as opposed to the rubber-hand illusion, there is
an additional quality—namely, the phenomenal experience of agency. A
full-blown bodily Ego is in place.
In order to survive, biological organisms must not only successfully
predict what is going to happen next in their immediate environment
but also be able to predict accurately their behavior and bodily movements along with their consequences. The self-model is a real-time predictor. This is how our best current theories explain what happened to
Philip: In our brains, we have a body emulator that uses motor commands to predict the likely proprioceptive and kinesthetic feedback that
results from moving our limbs in a certain way. For our actions to be
successfully controlled, we cannot wait for the actual feedback from our
arms and legs as we move through the world. We need an internal image
of our body as a whole that predicts the likely consequences of, say, an
attempt to move our left arm in a certain way. In order to be really eﬃcient, we need to know in advance what this would feel like. Furthermore, by “taking it oﬄine,” we can use our body emulator to create
motor imagery in our mind—to plan or imagine our body movements
without actually executing them.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

112

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 112

THE EGO TUNNEL

This body emulator, which constantly generates forward simulations,
is a fundamental part of the human self-model and the centerpiece of the
Ego Tunnel. Philip’s self-model had learned that whatever motor commands he issued to his amputated arm, there would be no feedback
telling him about a changed limb position. To be sure, the image of his
arm was still there, burned into his brain. It had adapted to zero feedback
and was therefore frozen. Ramachandran’s ingenious idea was to use a
mirror as a source of virtual information, allowing the virtual emulator
to perform a successful update. When Philip tried to move both his real
arm and his phantom arm, the changes in the visual self-model perfectly
matched the motor commands fed into the body-state predictor in
Philip’s brain. The conscious experience that his missing left arm was
actually moving and under volitional control followed suit.
Now we can understand why our self-model is a virtual model.
Clearly, Philip’s moving left arm is just a simulation. It is an “as if ” arm;
what has turned into a new possibility for the
brain is portrayed to Philip as a reality. If one
does not think about it but simply attends to
the experience itself, the moving phantom
limb can perhaps be experienced as just as realistic as the rest of the body; they are both
parts of the same uniﬁed self, and they are
both under volitional control. But exactly how
real the parts of our self-model appear depends on many diﬀerent factors.
One interesting fact about phantom-limb
experiences is that they also happen to people
Figure 14: Evidence for an innate who were born missing certain limbs. A recent
component of the body model?
case study conducted by Swiss neuroscientist
Phantoms (shaded areas) in a
Peter Brugger and his colleagues of the Universubject born without limbs. The
numbers are vividness ratings
sity Hospital in Zürich used a seven-point scale
for the felt presence of different
to rate the subjectively perceived vividness of
phantom body parts on a sevenphantom limbs. Interestingly, the ratings
point scale from 0 (no
awareness) to 6 (most vivid
showed highly consistent judgments across sesimpression). Picture courtesy of
sions for their subject, “AZ,” a forty-four-yearPeter Brugger, Zürich.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 113

Out of the Body and into the Mind

113

old university-educated woman born without forearms and legs. For as
long as she could remember, she had experienced mental images of her
nonexistent forearms (including ﬁngers) and legs (including feet and the
ﬁrst and ﬁfth toes). But, as the ﬁgure shows, these phantoms were not as
realistic as the content of her nonhallucinatory body model.
Moreover, she reported that “[a]wareness of her phantom limbs is
transiently disrupted only when some object or person invades their felt
position or when she sees herself in a mirror.” Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of her imagined phantom hand movements
showed no activation of primary sensorimotor areas, but did show activity in the bilateral premotor and parietal cortex. Transcranial magnetic stimulation of the sensorimotor cortex consistently elicited
sensations in the phantom ﬁngers and hand, on the side opposite the
stimulation. Premotor and parietal stimulation evoked similar phantom
sensations, though without showing motor-evoked potentials in the
stump. Brugger’s data demonstrate that body parts that never physically
developed can be represented in sensory and motor areas of the cortex.
The fascinating question is this: Are AZ’s hallucinated forearms and
legs components of an innate body model—perhaps of a nucleus that
continues developing after birth? Or could they have been “mirrored
into” the patient’s self-model through the visual observation of the
movements of other human beings (see chapter 6 on the Empathic
Ego)? What exactly is it that you feel as your own body, right now, as you
are reading these words? At this point in our investigations into consciousness, it seems obvious that we are never in direct contact with our
physical bodies but rather with a particular kind of representational
content. But what exactly is it that is represented in this layer of our conscious self? In the second book of his famous work De anima, Aristotle
said that the soul is simply the form of the body and that it perishes at
death. Is that what we have newly rediscovered by studying phantom
limbs, the “inner form” of the body and the global model of its shape?
Spinoza said the soul is the idea that the body develops of itself because
“the object of our soul is the body as it exists, and nothing else.”  Again,
it is intriguing to see how classical philosophical ideas contribute to a
deeper understanding of what it means to be an embodied self.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

114

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 114

THE EGO TUNNEL

Ramachandran’s and Brugger’s experiments demonstrate that the experiential content of the bodily self-model is the content of an ongoing
simulation, part of a dynamic control mechanism. At any given time, the
content of bodily experience is the best hypothesis that the system has
about its current body state. The brain’s job is to simulate the body for
the body and to predict the consequences of the body’s movements, and
the instrument it uses is the self-model. This process takes place in the
real world, so it is time-consuming and necessarily generates a lag between the actual state of the body and the self-model’s content.
Normally we’re unaware of this process, because nature engineered
it so eﬃciently that errors rarely occur. But the simple fact remains: You
are never in direct contact with your own body. What you feel in the
rubber-hand illusion, what AZ feels, or what Philip feels when his left
arm is “plugged in” is exactly the same as what you feel when you attend
to the sensation of your hands holding this book right now or to the feeling of pressure and resistance when you lean back in your chair. What
you experience is not reality but virtual reality, a possibility. Strictly
speaking, and on the level of conscious experience alone, you live your
life in a virtual body and not in a real one. This point will become clearer
when we consider “oﬄine states” in the chapter on dreaming and lucid
dreaming. But ﬁrst, let us have a look at another essential feature of phenomenal selfhood—the transition from ownership to agency.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 115

four


FROM OWNERSHIP TO
AGENCY TO FREE WIL L

Before the use of external tools could develop, a neurodynamic tool had
to be in place in our brains. I have been calling this inner tool the PSM,
the phenomenal self-model, a distinct and coherent pattern of neural
activity that allows you to integrate parts of the world into an inner image of yourself as a whole. Only if you have a self-model can you experience your hands and your arms as parts of your own body. Only if you
have a self-model can you experience certain cognitive processes in your
brain as your own thoughts and certain events in the motor parts of
your brain as your own intentions and acts of will. Our next step is the
step from ownership to agency.

THE A LIEN HA ND
Imagine that about ten days after undergoing heart surgery you notice a
weakness in your left side and experience diﬃculties walking. For the
past three days, you have also had a more speciﬁc problem: Somehow,
you keep losing control of your left hand—it is acting on its own. Last
night, you awoke several times because your left hand was trying to

115

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

116

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 116

THE EGO TUNNEL

choke you, and you had to use your right hand to ﬁght it oﬀ. During the
day, your left hand sometimes unbuttons your hospital gown just after
your right hand has buttoned it up. Your left hand crushes the paper
cups on your tray or starts ﬁghting with your right hand while you’re
trying to answer the phone. It’s an unpleasant situation, to say the
least—as if someone “from the moon” were controlling your hand.
Sometimes you wonder whether it has a mind of its own.
What does it mean for something to “have a mind of its own”? Having a mind means possessing inner states that have content and embedding such thoughts and inner images of the world into a self-model.
Then the organism harboring them can know that they are occurring
within itself. So far, so good. But there is an important aspect of having a
mind of your own that we’ve not yet discussed: You also need explicit
representations of goal-states—your requirements, your desires, your
values, what you want to achieve by acting in the world. And you need a
conscious Ego to appropriate these goal-states, to make them your own.
Philosophers call this having “practical intentionality”: Mental states are
often directed at the fulﬁllment of your personal goals. Having a mind
means being not only a thinker and a knower but also an agent—an acting self, with a will of one’s own.
That is where the Alien Hand syndrome, the neurological disorder
just described, comes in. The syndrome was ﬁrst described in 1908, but
the term was not introduced until 1972, and it still isn’t clear what the
necessary and suﬃcient conditions in the brain for this kind of disorder are. The alien hand crushing cups on the tray and ﬁghting with
the healthy right hand seems to have a will of its own. When the alien
hand begins unbuttoning the patient’s gown, this is not automatic behavior like the knee-jerk reﬂex; it appears to be guided by an explicit
goal-representation. Apparently a little agent is embedded in the bigger
agent—a subpersonal entity pursuing its own goals by hijacking a body
part that belongs to the patient. In another typical case, a patient will
pick up a pencil and begin scribbling with one hand, reacting with dismay when she becomes aware of this. She will then immediately withdraw the pencil, pull the alien hand to her side with her “good” hand,
and indicate that she did not initiate the scribbling herself. Another

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 117

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

117

such case study describes the patient’s left hand groping for nearby objects and picking and pulling at her clothes to the point that she refers to
her errant hand as an autonomous entity.
These cases are interesting from a philosophical point of view, because any convincing philosophical theory of the conscious self will
have to explain the dissociation of ownership and agency. Patients suffering from Alien Hand syndrome still experience the hand as their own
hand; the conscious sense of ownership is still there, but there is no corresponding experience of will in the patient’s mind. As philosophers say,
the “volitional act” is missing, and the goal-state driving the alien hand’s
behavior is not represented in the person’s conscious mind. The fact
that the arm is clearly a subpersonal part of the body makes it even more
striking to see how the patient automatically attributes something like
intentionality and personhood to it, treating it as an autonomous agent.
This conﬂict between the hand and the willing self can even become a
conﬂict between the hand and the thinking self. For instance, when one
patient’s left hand made a move he did not wish to make in a game of
checkers, he corrected the move with his right hand. Then, to his frustration, the isolated functional module in his brain that was driving his
left arm caused it to repeat the unwanted move.
Here is the philosophical problem: Is the unwanted move in the game
of checkers an action—that is, a bodily movement directly caused by an
explicit goal-representation—or is it only an event, something that just
happens, caused by something else? At one extreme of the philosophical
spectrum, we ﬁnd denial of the freedom of will: No such things as “actions” or “agents” exist, and, strictly speaking, predetermined physical
events are all that have ever existed. We are all automata. If our hardware
is damaged, individual subsystems may act up—a sad fact, but certainly
no mystery. The other extreme is to hold that there are no blind, purely
physical events in the universe at all, that every single event is a goal-driven action, caused by a person—for instance, by the mind of God. Nothing happens by chance; everything is purposeful and ultimately willed.
In fact, in some psychiatric syndromes, patients experience every
consciously perceived event in their environment as directly caused by
themselves. In other mental diseases, such as schizophrenia, one may

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

118

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 118

THE EGO TUNNEL

feel that one’s body and thoughts are remote-controlled and that the
whole world is one big machine, a soulless and meaningless mechanism
grinding away. Note that both types of observations illustrate my claim
in chapter 1 that we must view the brain as a reality engine: It is a system that constantly makes assumptions about what exists and what
doesn’t, thereby creating an inner reality including time, space, and causal
relations. Psychiatric diseases are reality-models—alternate ontologies
developed to cope with serious and often speciﬁc problems. Interestingly, in almost all cases these alternate ontologies can be mapped onto
a philosophical ontology—that is, they will correspond to some wellestablished metaphysical idea about the deeper structure of reality (radical determinism, say, or the omnipotent, omnipresent God’s-eye view).
But to return to the original question: Do actions as such really exist?
A position between the two philosophical extremes would deﬁne “action” as a particular kind of physical event. Most events in the physical
universe are only events, but an extremely tiny subset are also actions—
that is, events caused by an explicit goal-representation in the conscious
mind of a rational agent. Goal-states must be owned by being part of a
self-model. No Ego Tunnel, no action.
The alien hand, however, is not a distinct entity with an Ego Tunnel.
It is just a body part and has no self-model. It does not know about its
existence, nor does a world appear to it. Due to a brain lesion, it is
driven by one of the many unconscious goal-representations constantly
ﬁghting for attention in your brain—plausibly, it is driven by visually
perceived objects in your immediate vicinity that give rise to what psychologists and philosophers call aﬀordances. There is good evidence
that the brain portrays visual objects not only as such but also in terms
of possible movements: Is this something I could grasp? Is this something I could unbutton? Is this something I could eat or drink?
The self-model is an important part of the selection mechanism.
Right now, as you are reading this book, it is protecting you from these
aﬀordances, preventing them from taking over parts of your body. If I
were to put a plate of your favorite chocolate cookies in front of you
and if you had the ﬁrm determination not to reach for it, how long
could you keep concentrating on the book? How long before a brief

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 119

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

119

episode of Alien Hand syndrome would pop up and your left hand
would do something you hadn’t told it to do? The stronger and more
stable your self-model, the less susceptible you are to the aﬀordances
surrounding you. Autonomy comes in degrees; it has to do with immunization, with shielding yourself from infection by potential goal-states
in the environment.
The phenomenal experience of ownership and the phenomenal experience of agency are thus intimately related, and both are important
aspects of the conscious sense of self. If you lose control over your actions, your sense of self is greatly diminished. This is also true of inner
actions; for example, many schizophrenics feel that not only their bodies
but even their thoughts are controlled by alien forces. One of my pet
ideas for many years might well turn out to be true—namely, that thinking is a motor process. Could thoughts be models of successfully terminated actions but from a God’s-eye view—that is, independent of your
own vantage point? Could they be abstract forms of grasping—of holding an object and taking it in, into your self? As I discuss in the chapter
on the Empathic Ego, there is solid empirical evidence showing that the
hand is represented in Broca’s area, a part of our brain that is of recent
evolution, distinguishes us from monkeys, and has to do with language
comprehension and abstract meaning. The thinking self would then
have grown out of the bodily self, by simulating bodily movements in an
abstract, mental space. I have been ﬂirting with this idea for a long time,
because it would solve Descartes’ mind-body problem; it would show
how a thinking thing—a res cogitans—could have evolved out of an extended thing, a res extensa. And this points to a theme running through
much of the recent research on agency and the self: In its origin, the Ego
is a neurocomputational device for appropriating and controlling the
body—ﬁrst the physical one and then the virtual one.
There is a kind of agency even more subtle than the ability to experience yourself as a coherent acting self and the direct cause of change:
This is what I call attentional agency. Attentional agency is the experience of being the entity that controls what Edmund Husserl described as
Blickstrahl der Aufmerksamkeit—the “ray of attention.” As an attentional agent, you can initiate a shift in attention and, as it were, direct

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

120

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 120

THE EGO TUNNEL

your inner ﬂashlight at certain targets: a perceptual object, say, or a speciﬁc feeling. In many situations, people lose the property of attentional
agency, and consequently their sense of self is weakened. Infants cannot
control their visual attention; their gaze seems to wander aimlessly from
one object to another, because this part of their Ego is not yet consolidated. Another example of consciousness without attentional control is
the dream state, and, as I discuss in the next chapter, the Ego of the
dream state is indeed very diﬀerent from that of the waking state. In
other cases, too, such as severe drunkenness or senile dementia, you
may lose the ability to direct your attention—and, correspondingly, feel
that your “self ” is falling apart.
Then there is cognitive agency, an interesting parallel to what
philosophers call the “cognitive subject.” The cognitive subject is a
thinker of thoughts and can also ascribe this faculty to herself. But often thoughts just drift by, like clouds. Meditators—like the Tibetan
monks in chapter 2—strive to diminish their sense of self, letting their
thoughts drift by instead of clinging to their content, attentively but effortlessly letting them dissolve. If you had never had the conscious experience of causing your own thoughts, ordering and sustaining them,
being attached to their content, you would never have experienced
yourself as a thinking self. That part of your self-model would simply
have dried up and withered away. In order to have Descartes’ experience of the Cogito—the robust experience of being a thinking thing, an
Ego—you must also have had the experience of deliberately selecting the
contents of your mind. This is what the various forms of agency have in
common: Agency allows us to select things: our next thought, the next
perceptual object we want to focus on, our next bodily movement. It is
also the experience of executive consciousness—not only the experience
of initiating change but also of carrying it through and sustaining a more
complex action over time. At least this is the way we have described our
inner experience for centuries.
A related aspect that bodily agency, attentional agency, and cognitive
agency have in common is the subjective sense of eﬀort. Phenomenologically, it is an eﬀort to move your body. It is also an eﬀort to focus
your attention. And it certainly is an eﬀort to think in a concentrated,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 121

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

121

logical fashion. What is the neural correlate of the sense of eﬀort? Imagine we knew this neural correlate (we will soon), and we also had a precise and well-tested mathematical model describing what is common to
all three kinds of experiencing a sense of eﬀort. Imagine you are a future
mathematician who can understand this description in all of its intricate
detail. Now, given this detailed conceptual knowledge, you introspect
your own sense of eﬀort, very gently, but with great precision. What
would happen? If you were to gently and carefully attend to, say, the
sense of eﬀort going along with an act of will, would it still appear as
something personal, something that belongs to you?
The Alien Hand syndrome forces us to conclude that what we call the
will can be outside our self-model as well as inside it. Such goal-directed
movements might not even be consciously experienced at all. In a serious neurological disorder called akinetic mutism, patients do nothing
but lie silently in their beds. They have a sense of ownership of their
body as a whole, but although they are awake (and go through the ordinary sleep-wake cycle), they are not agents: They do not act in any way.
They do not initiate any thoughts. They do not direct their attention.
They do not talk or move. Then there are those cases in which parts of
our bodies perform complex goal-directed actions without our having
the conscious experience of these being our actions or our goals, without a conscious act of will having preceded them—in short, without the
experience of being an agent. Another interesting aspect—and the third
empirical fact that any philosophy of the conscious self must explain—
is how, for instance, schizophrenics sometimes lose the sense of agency
and executive consciousness entirely and feel themselves to be remotecontrolled puppets.
Many of our best empirical theories suggest that the special sense of
self associated with agency has to do both with the conscious experience
of having an intention and with the experience of motor feedback. That
is, the experience of selecting a certain goal-state must be integrated
with the subsequent experience of bodily movement. The self-model
achieves just that. It binds the processes by which the mind creates and
compares competing alternatives for action with feedback from your
bodily movements. This binding turns the experience of movement into

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

122

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 122

THE EGO TUNNEL

the experience of an action. But note, once again, that neither the
“mind” nor the self-model is a little man in the head; there is no one doing the creating, the comparing, and the deciding. If the dynamicalsystems theory is correct, then all of this is a case of dynamical selforganization in the brain. If for some reason the two core elements—the
selection of a speciﬁc movement pattern and ongoing motor feedback—
cannot be successfully bound, you might experience your bodily
movements as uncontrolled and erratic (or as controlled by someone
else, as schizophrenics sometimes do). Or you might experience them as
willed and goal-directed but not as self-initiated, as in the Alien Hand
syndrome.

HA LLUCINATING AGENCY
Thus, selfhood is something independent, because one can retain the
sense of ownership yet lose the sense of agency. But can one also hallucinate agency? The answer is yes—and, oddly, many consciousness
philosophers have long ignored this phenomenon. You can have the robust, conscious experience of having intended an action even if this
wasn’t the case. By directly stimulating the brain, we can trigger not only
the execution of a bodily movement but also the conscious experience
of having the urge to perform that movement. We can experimentally
induce the conscious experience of will.
Here’s an example. Stéphane Kremer and his colleagues at the University Hospital of Strasbourg stimulated a speciﬁc brain region (the
ventral bank of the anterior cingulate sulcus) in a female patient with
medically intractable epileptic seizures, in order to locate the epileptogenic zone before performing surgery. In this case, the stimulation
caused rapid eye movements scanning both sides of the visual ﬁeld. The
patient began to search for the nearest object she could grasp, and the
arm that was opposite the stimulated side—her left arm—began to wander to the right. She reported a strong “urge to grasp,” which she was unable to control. As soon as she saw a potential target object, her left
hand moved toward it and seized it. On the level of her conscious experience, the irrepressible urge to grasp the object started and ended with

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 123

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

123

the stimulation of her brain. This much is clear: Whatever else the conscious experience of will may be, it seems to be something that can be
turned on and oﬀ with the help of a small electrical current from an
electrode in the brain.
But there are also ways of elegantly inducing the experience of
agency by purely psychological means. In the 1990s at the University of
Virginia, psychologists Daniel M. Wegner and Thalia Wheatley investigated the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for “the experience of conscious will” with the help of an ingenious experiment. In a study they
dubbed “I Spy,” they led subjects to experience a causal link between a
thought and an action, managing to induce the feeling in their subjects
that the subjects had willfully performed an action even though the action had in fact been performed by someone else.
Each subject was paired with a confederate, who posed as another
subject. They sat at a table across from each other and were asked to
place their ﬁngertips on a little square board mounted on a computer
mouse, enabling them to move the mouse together, Ouija-board style.
On a computer screen visible to both was a photograph from a children’s book showing some ﬁfty objects (plastic dinosaurs, cars, swans,
and so on).
The real subject and the confederate both wore headphones, and it
was explained to them that this was an experiment meant to “investigate
people’s feelings of intention for acts and how these feelings come and
go.” They were told to move the mouse around the computer screen for
thirty seconds or so while listening to separate audio tracks containing random
words—some of which would refer to one
or another object on the screen—along
with ten-second intervals of music. The
words on each track would be diﬀerent, but
the timing of the music would be the same.
When they heard the music, they were to Figure 15: Hallucinated agency.
How to make subjects think they
stop the mouse on an object after a few secinitiated a movement they never
onds and “rate each stop they made for perintended. Figure courtesy of
sonal intentionality.” Unknown to the Daniel Wegner.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

124

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 124

THE EGO TUNNEL

subject, however, the confederate did not hear any words or music at all
but instead received instructions from the experimenters to perform
particular movements. For four of the twenty or thirty trials, the confederate was told to stop the mouse on a particular object (each time a different one); these forced stops were made to occur within the prescribed
musical interval and at various times after the subject had heard the corresponding word over her headphones (“swan,” say).
According to the subjects’ ratings, there was a general tendency to
perceive the forced stops as intended. The ratings were highest when
the corresponding word occurred between one and ﬁve seconds before
the stop. Based on these ﬁndings, Wegner and Wheatley suggest that the
phenomenal experience of will, or mental causation, is governed by three
principles: The principle of exclusivity holds that the subject’s thought
should be the only introspectively available cause of action; the principle
of consistency holds that the subjective intention should be consistent
with the action; and the principle of priority holds that the thought
should precede the action “in a timely manner.”
The social context and the long-term experience of being an agent of
course contribute to creating the sense of agency. One might suspect
that the sense of agency is only a subjective appearance, a swift reconstruction after the act; still, today’s best cognitive neuroscience of the
conscious will shows that it is also a preconstruction. Experiencing
yourself as a willing agent has much to do with, as it were, introspectively peeping into the middle of a long processing chain in your brain.
This chain leads from certain preparatory processes that might be described as “assembling a motor command” to the feedback you get from
perceiving your movements. Patrick Haggard, of University College
London, perhaps the leading researcher in the fascinating and somewhat frightening new ﬁeld of research into agency and the self, has
demonstrated that our conscious awareness of movement is not generated by the execution of ready-made motor commands; instead, it is
shaped by preparatory processes in the premotor system of the brain.
Various experiments show that our awareness of intention is closely related to the speciﬁcation of which movements we want to make. When
the brain simulates alternative possibilities—say, of reaching for a par-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 125

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

125

ticular object—the conscious experience of intention seems to be directly related to the selection of a speciﬁc movement. That is, the awareness of movement is associated not so much with the actual execution
as with an earlier brain stage: the process of preparing a movement by
assembling diﬀerent parts of it into a coherent whole—a motor gestalt,
as it were.
Haggard points out that the awareness of intention and the awareness of movement are conceptually distinct, but he speculates that they
must derive from a single processing stage in the motor pathway. It
looks as though our access to the ongoing motor-processing in our
brains is extremely restricted; awareness is limited to a very narrow window of premotor activity, an intermediate phase of a longer process. If
Haggard is right, then the sense of agency, the conscious experience of
being someone who acts, results from the process of binding the awareness of intention together with the representation of one’s actual movements. This also suggests what subjective awareness of intention is good
for: It can detect potential mismatches with events occurring in the
world outside the brain.
Whatever the precise technical details turn out to be, we are now beginning to see what the conscious experience of agency is and how to
explain its evolutionary function. The conscious experience of will and
of agency allows an organism to own the subpersonal processes in its
brain responsible for the selection of action goals, the construction of
speciﬁc movement patterns, and the control of feedback from the body.
When this sense of agency evolved in human beings, some of the stages
in the immensely complex causal network in our brains were raised to
the level of global availability. Now we could attend to them, think about
them, and possibly even interrupt them. For the ﬁrst time, we could experience ourselves as beings with goals, and we could use internal representations of these goals to control our bodies. For the ﬁrst time, we
could form an internal image of ourselves as able to fulﬁll certain needs
by choosing an optimal route. Moreover, conceiving of ourselves as autonomous agents enabled us to discover that other beings in our environment probably were agents, too, who had goals of their own. But I
must postpone this analysis of the social dimension of the self for a

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

126

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 126

THE EGO TUNNEL

while and turn to a classical problem of philosophy of mind: the freedom of the will.

HOW FREE A RE WE?
As noted previously, the philosophical spectrum on freedom of the will
is a wide one, ranging from outright denial to the claim that all physical
events are goal-driven and caused by a divine agent, that nothing happens by chance, that everything is, ultimately, willed. The most beautiful
idea, perhaps, is that freedom and determinism can peacefully coexist:
If our brains are causally determined in the right way, if they make us
causally sensitive to moral considerations and rational arguments, then
this very fact makes us free. Determinism and free will are compatible.
However, I take no position on free will here, because I am interested in
two other points. I address the ﬁrst by asking one simple question: What
does ongoing scientiﬁc research on the physical underpinnings of actions and of conscious will tell us about this age-old controversy?
Probably most professional philosophers in the ﬁeld would hold that
given your body, the state of your brain, and your speciﬁc environment,
you could not act diﬀerently from the way you’re acting now—that your
actions are preordained, as it were. Imagine that we could produce a
perfect duplicate of you, a functionally identical twin who is an exact
copy of your molecular structure. If we were to put your twin in exactly
the same situation you’re in right now, with exactly the same sensory
stimuli impinging on him or her, then initially the twin could not act differently from the way you’re acting. This is a widely shared view: It is,
simply, the scientiﬁc worldview. The current state of the physical universe always determines the next state of the universe, and your brain is
a part of this universe.
The phenomenal Ego, the experiential content of the human selfmodel, clearly disagrees with the scientiﬁc worldview—and with the
widely shared opinion that your functionally identical doppelgänger
could not have acted otherwise. If we take our own phenomenology seriously, we clearly experience ourselves as beings that can initiate new
causal chains out of the blue—as beings that could have acted otherwise

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 127

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

127

given exactly the same situation. The unsettling point about modern
philosophy of mind and the cognitive neuroscience of will, already apparent even at this early stage, is that a ﬁnal theory may contradict the
way we have been subjectively experiencing ourselves for millennia.
There will likely be a conﬂict between the scientiﬁc view of the acting
self and the phenomenal narrative, the subjective story our brains tell us
about what happens when we decide to act.
We now have a theory in hand that explains how subpersonal brain
events (for instance, those that specify action goals and assemble suitable motor commands) can become the contents of the conscious self.
When certain processing stages are elevated to the level of conscious experience and bound into the self-model active in your brain, they become available for all your mental capacities. Now you experience them
as your own thoughts, decisions, or urges to act—as properties that belong to you, the person as a whole. It is also clear why these events popping up in the conscious self necessarily appear spontaneous and
uncaused. They are the ﬁrst link in the chain to cross the border from
unconscious to conscious brain processes; you have the impression that
they appeared in your mind “out of the blue,” so to speak. The unconscious precursor is invisible, but the link exists. (Recently, this has been
shown for the conscious veto, as when you interrupt an intentional action at the last instant.)13 But in fact the conscious experience of intention is just a sliver of a complicated process in the brain. And since this
fact does not appear to us, we have the robust experience of being able
to spontaneously initiate causal chains from the mental into the physical
realm. This is the appearance of an agent. (Here we also gain a deeper
understanding of what it means to say that the self-model is transparent.
Often the brain is blind to its own workings, as it were.)
The science of the mind is now beginning to reintroduce those hidden facts forcefully into the Ego Tunnel. There will be a conﬂict between
the biological reality tunnel in our heads and the neuroscientiﬁc image
of humankind, and many people sense that this image might present a
danger to our mental health. I think the irritation and deep sense of resentment surrounding public debates on the freedom of the will have little to do with the actual options on the table. These reactions have to do

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

128

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 128

THE EGO TUNNEL

with the (perfectly sensible) intuition that certain types of answers will
not only be emotionally disturbing but ultimately impossible to integrate into our conscious self-models. This is the ﬁrst point.
A note on the phenomenology of will: It is not as well deﬁned as you
might think; color experience, for example, is much crisper. Have you
ever tried to observe introspectively what happens when you decide to
lift your arm and then the arm lifts? What exactly is the deep, ﬁnegrained structure of cause and eﬀect? Can you really observe how the
mental event causes the physical event? Look closely! My prediction is
that the closer you look and the more thoroughly you introspect your
decision processes, the more you’ll realize that conscious intentions are
evasive: The harder you look at them, the more they recede into the
background. Moreover, we tend to talk about free will as if we all shared
a common subjective experience. This is not entirely true: Culture and
tradition exert a strong inﬂuence on the way we report such experiences. The phenomenology itself may well be shaped by this, because a
self-model also is the window connecting our inner lives with the social
practice around us. Free will does not exist in our minds alone—it is also
a social institution. The assumption that something like free agency exists, and the fact that we treat one another as autonomous agents, are
concepts fundamental to our legal system and the rules governing our
societies—rules built on the notions of responsibility, accountability,
and guilt. These rules are mirrored in the deep structure of our PSM,
and this incessant mirroring of rules, this projection of higher-order assumptions about ourselves, created complex social networks. If one day
we must tell an entirely diﬀerent story about what human will is or is
not, this will aﬀect our societies in an unprecedented way. For instance,
if accountability and responsibility do not really exist, it is meaningless
to punish people (as opposed to rehabilitating them) for something they
ultimately could not have avoided doing. Retribution would then appear
to be a Stone Age concept, something we inherited from animals. When
modern neuroscience discovers the suﬃcient neural correlates for willing, desiring, deliberating, and executing an action, we will be able to
cause, amplify, extinguish, and modulate the conscious experience of
will by operating on these neural correlates. It will become clear that the

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 129

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

129

actual causes of our actions, desires, and intentions often have very little to do with what the conscious self tells us. From a scientiﬁc, thirdperson perspective, our inner experience of strong autonomy may look
increasingly like what it has been all along: an appearance only. At the
same time, we will learn to admire the elegance and the robustness with
which nature built only those things into the reality tunnel that organisms needed to know, rather than burdening them with a ﬂood of information about the workings of their brains. We will come to see the
subjective experience of free will as an ingenious neurocomputational
tool. Not only does it create an internal user-interface that allows the organism to control and adapt its behavior, but it is also a necessary condition for social interaction and cultural evolution.
Imagine that we have created a society of robots. They would lack
freedom of the will in the traditional sense, because they are causally
determined automata. But they would have conscious models of themselves and of other automata in their environment, and these models
would let them interact with others and control their own behavior.
Imagine that we now add two features to their internal self- and otherperson models: ﬁrst, the erroneous belief that they (and everybody
else) are responsible for their own actions; second, an “ideal observer”
representing group interests, such as rules of fairness for reciprocal, altruistic interactions. What would this change? Would our robots develop new causal properties just by falsely believing in their own
freedom of the will? The answer is yes; moral aggression would become
possible, because an entirely new level of competition would emerge—
competition about who fulﬁlls the interests of the group best, who gains
moral merit, and so on. You could now raise your own social status by
accusing others of being immoral or by being an eﬃcient hypocrite. A
whole new level of optimizing behavior would emerge. Given the right
boundary conditions, the complexity of our experimental robot society
would suddenly explode, though its internal coherence would remain. It
could now begin to evolve on a new level. The practice of ascribing
moral responsibility—even if based on delusional PSMs—would create
a decisive, and very real, functional property: Group interests would become more eﬀective in each robot’s behavior. The price for egotism

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

130

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 130

THE EGO TUNNEL

would rise. What would happen to our experimental robot society if we
then downgraded its members’ self-models to the previous version—
perhaps by bestowing insight?
A passionate public debate recently took place in Germany on freedom of the will—a failed debate, in my view, because it created more
confusion than clarity. Here is the ﬁrst of the two silliest arguments for
the freedom of will: “But I know that I am free, because I experience myself as free!” Well, you also experience the world as inhabited by colored
objects, and we know that out there in front of your eyes are only wavelength mixtures of various sorts. That something appears to you in conscious experience and in a certain way is not an argument for anything.
The second argument goes like this: “But this would have terrible consequences! Therefore, it cannot be true.” I certainly share that worry (think
of the robot society thought experiment), but the truth of a claim must
be assessed independently of its psychological or political consequences. This is a point of simple logic and intellectual honesty. But
neuroscientists have also added to the confusion—and, interestingly, because they often underestimate the radical nature of their positions.
This will be my second point in this section.
Neuroscientists like to speak of “action goals,” processes of “motor
selection,” and the “speciﬁcation of movements” in the brain. As a
philosopher (and with all due respect), I must say that this, too, is conceptual nonsense. If one takes the scientiﬁc worldview seriously, no such
things as goals exist, and there is nobody who selects or speciﬁes an action. There is no process of “selection” at all; all we really have is dynamical self-organization. Moreover, the information-processing taking
place in the human brain is not even a rule-based kind of processing. Ultimately, it follows the laws of physics. The brain is best described as a
complex system continuously trying to settle into a stable state, generating order out of chaos.
According to the purely physical background assumptions of science,
nothing in the universe possesses an inherent value or is a goal in itself;
physical objects and processes are all there is. That seems to be the
point of the rigorous reductionist approach—and exactly what beings
with self-models like ours cannot bring themselves to believe. Of course,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 131

From Ownership to Agency to Free Will

131

there can be goal representations in the brains of biological organisms,
but ultimately—if neuroscience is to take its own background assumptions seriously—they refer to nothing. Survival, ﬁtness, well-being, and
security as such are not values or goals in the true sense of either word;
obviously, only those organisms that internally represented them as
goals survived. But the tendency to speak about the “goals” of an organism or a brain makes neuroscientists overlook how strong their very
own background assumptions are. We can now begin to see that even
hardheaded scientists sometimes underestimate how radical a naturalistic combination of neuroscience and evolutionary theory could be: It
could turn us into beings that maximized their overall ﬁtness by beginning to hallucinate goals.
I am not claiming that this is the true story, the whole story, or the ﬁnal story. I am only pointing out what seems to follow from the discoveries of neuroscience and how these discoveries conﬂict with our
conscious self-model. Subpersonal self-organization in the brain simply
has nothing to do with what we mean by “selection.” Of course, complex
and ﬂexible behaviors caused by inner images of “goals” still exist, and
we may also continue to call these behaviors “actions.” But even if actions, in this sense, continue to be part of the picture, we may learn that
agents do not—that is, there is no entity doing the acting.
The study of phantom limbs helped us understand how parts of our
bodies can be portrayed in the phenomenal self-model even if they do
not exist or have never existed. Out-of-body experiences and full-body
illusions demonstrated how a minimal sense of self and the experience
of “global ownership” can emerge. A brief look at the Alien Hand and
the neural underpinnings of the willing self gave us an idea of how the
feeling of agency would, by necessity, appear in our conscious brains
and how this fact could have contributed to the formation of complex
societies. Next, investigating the Ego Tunnel during the dream state will
give us even deeper insight into the conditions under which a true subject of experience emerges. How does the Dream Tunnel become an Ego
Tunnel?

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 132

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 133

five


PHILOSOPHICA L PSYCHONAUTICS
What Can We Learn from Lucid Dreaming?

During the night of May 6, 1986, I became consciously aware that I was
sleeping and also spiraling out of my physical body, in the typical manner described by Swiss biochemist Ernst Waelti (see chapter 3). Here is
my “case study”:
Standing in front of my bed, I immediately realized that, for the
first time in two years, I had entered the OBE state again. The
clarity, the same electrified sense of lightness in my double
body, made me excited and extremely happy, and I immediately
began to experiment. I moved toward the closed glass door of
the second-floor balcony in my parents’ house. I touched the
door, gently pushing it until I penetrated it and slid out onto the
balcony. I flew down into the garden and landed on the lawn,
where I moved around in the dim moonlight and looked at
things. Again, the overall experience was crystal clear.
When I became afraid of not being able to sustain the condition much longer, I flew back up, somehow returned to my
physical body, and awoke with a mixture of great pride and joy. I
had not managed to make any verifiable observations, but I had
133

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

134

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 134

THE EGO TUNNEL
had another OBE, in a clear, cognitively lucid way, fully controlled and without any intermediary blackouts. I sat up, wanting to take notes as long as everything was still fresh, but
couldn’t find a pencil.
I jumped out of bed and went over to my sister (who slept in
the same room), woke her up, and told her, with great excitement, that I had just managed to do it again, that I had just been
down in the garden, bouncing around on the lawn a minute ago.
My sister looked at her alarm clock and said, “Man, it’s quarter
to three! Why did you have to wake me up? Can’t this wait until
breakfast? Turn out the light and leave me alone!” She turned
over and went back to sleep. I was a bit disappointed at this lack
of interest.
I also noticed that while fumbling with the alarm clock, she
had accidentally set it off. It was beeping away and I hoped it
hadn’t wakened anybody else. Too late! I could hear someone
approaching.

At that moment, I woke up. I was not upstairs in my parents’ house in
Frankfurt but in my basement room, in the house I shared with four
friends about thirty-ﬁve kilometers away. It was not quarter to three at
night; the sun was shining and I had obviously been taking a short afternoon nap. For more than ﬁve minutes, I sat on the edge of my bed almost frozen, not daring to move. I was unsure how real this situation
was. I did not understand what had just happened to me. I didn’t dare
move, because I was afraid I might wake up again, into yet another ultrarealistic environment.
In dream research, this is a well-known phenomenon called false
awakening. Did I really have an out-of-body experience? Or did I only
have a lucid dream of an out-of-body experience? Can one slide from an
OBE into an ordinary dream via a false awakening? Are all OBEs forms
of lucid dreaming in the ﬁrst place? To wake up twice in a row is something that can shatter many of the theoretical intuitions you have about
consciousness—for instance, that the vividness, the coherence, and the
crispness of a conscious experience are evidence that you are really in

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 135

Philosophical Psychonautics

135

touch with reality. Apparently, what we call “waking up” is something
that can happen to you at any point in phenomenological time. This is a
highly relevant empirical fact for philosophical epistemology. Do you
recall from chapter 2 the discussion about the evolution of human consciousness and how the distinction between things that only appear to
us and objective fact became an element of our lived reality? Now we
can see what it means that the appearance/reality distinction emerged
only on the level of appearance: False awakenings demonstrate that consciousness is never more than the appearance of a world. There is no
certainty involved, not even about the state, the general category of conscious experience in which you ﬁnd yourself. So, how do you know that
you actually woke up this morning? Couldn’t it be that everything you
have ever experienced was only a dream? 
Dreams are conscious because they create the appearance of a world,
but, as noted in chapter 2, they are oﬄine states—global states of conscious experience in which the Ego is decoupled from sensory input and
unable to generate overt motor behavior. The dream tunnel not only
contains the appearance of a world but also (in most cases) creates a
fully embodied, spatially extended self moving around in a spatially extended environment. The virtual self thus born is an exclusively internal
phenomenon in an even stronger sense than that of the waking self: It is
immersed in a dense mesh of causal relations, all of which are internal to
the brain. Dreamers are self-aware, but functionally they are not situated. Dreams are subjective states in that there is a phenomenal self;
however, the perspective from which this conscious self perceives the
world is very diﬀerent—and much more unstable—than it is during
wakefulness.
Have you ever noticed that you cannot control your attentional focus
in your dreams? High-level attention is typically missing. Accordingly,
the dream-self generated inside the Ego Tunnel when you are sleeping
lacks the speciﬁc phenomenal quality I described in the preceding chapter as attentional agency, the conscious experience of directing the beam
of your inner ﬂashlight deliberately and selectively at various objects.
But attentional agency is not just the ability to “zoom in” on certain
things or point your mind at particular features of your world-model; it

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

136

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 136

THE EGO TUNNEL

also entails the sense of ownership—ownership of the selection process
preceding the shift in attention. Both aspects are missing in dreams. In a
way, you are like an infant or a severely intoxicated person. The dream
Ego is much weaker than the waking Ego.
If one penetrates deeper into the speciﬁc phenomenology created by
the dreaming Ego, one discovers a considerable weakness of will and severe distortions of the thought process. In ordinary dreams, you sometimes cannot experience yourself as any sort of agent at all. It is diﬃcult,
for example, to make a decision and follow through with it. But even if
you manage that, you are typically unable to ascribe agency to yourself.
The dreaming self is a confused thinker, severely disoriented with regard to places, times, and people’s identities. Short-term memory is
greatly impaired and unreliable. Also, only rarely does the dream self
have such sensory experiences as pain, temperature, smell, or taste.
Even more interesting is the extreme instability of the ﬁrst-person perspective: Attention, thinking, and willing are highly unstable and exist
only intermittently, yet the ordinary dreaming Ego does not really care
about this, or even notice it. The dream self is like the anosognostic patient, who lacks insight into a deﬁcit following brain injury.
At the same time, the dream self creates intense emotional experiences—some aspects of the self are clearly stronger in the dream tunnel
than in the tunnel of waking consciousness. Anyone who has ever had a
nightmare knows how intense the feeling of panic can become during
dreams. In the dream state, the emotional self-model can be characterized by unusually intense degrees of feeling, though this is not true for
all emotions; for example, fear, elation, and anger predominate over sadness, shame, and guilt.
Occasionally, the dream tunnel enables the Ego to access information
about itself that is unavailable during the waking state. Whereas shortterm memory is commonly impaired, long-term memory can be greatly
enhanced. For instance, it is possible to relive childhood episodes
vividly—memories that would never have been accessible during wakefulness. We tend to forget these afterward, because most of us have
weak dream recall. But as long as the dream lasts, we have access to
state-speciﬁc forms of self-knowledge.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 137

Philosophical Psychonautics

137

Blind people are sometimes able to see in dreams. Helen Keller, who
turned blind and deaf at the age of nineteen months, emphasized the
importance of these occasional visual experiences: “Blot out dreams,
and the blind lose one of their chief comforts; for in the visions of sleep
they behold their belief in the seeing mind and their expectation of light
beyond the blank, narrow night justiﬁed.” In one study, congenitally
blind subjects produced dream drawings that judges were unable to distinguish from drawings of sighted subjects, and as EEG correlates between were suﬃciently similar, this strongly suggests that they can see in
their dreams—but do they? It is also interesting to note that Keller’s
dream tunnel contained the phenomenal qualities associated with smell
and taste, which most of us experience only rarely in the dream state. It
seems as if her dream tunnel became richer because her waking tunnel
had lost some of its qualitative dimensions.
The dream tunnel shows to what extent conscious experience is a
virtual reality. It internally simulates a behavioral space, a space of possibilities in which you can act. It simulates real-life sense impressions. As
discussed in chapter 3, this is exactly what modern designers of virtual
realities are trying to achieve (indeed, one of the best scientiﬁc journals
on virtual-reality technology is titled Presence). It is precisely this sense
of presence and full immersion that our biological ancestors achieved
long ago. The resultant Ego, however, has created a more robust sense of
presence for dreaming and for waking life as well. If it had not done so,
we probably would not be trying to create virtual realities today, nor
would we research the ability of the human brain to achieve this miracle
within itself.
Even though dreams are behavioral spaces, they are not causally coupled to the real behavioral space of the dreaming human organism.
Dreamers are not bodily agents; their behavior is internal, simulated behavior. The inhibition of the spinal motor neurons prevents bodily behavior from being generated during dream sleep—that is, REM
(rapid-eye-movement) sleep. This is how the dream Ego is separated
from the physical body. When this motor inhibition fails, as it does in a
disorder known as RBD (for “REM-sleep behavior disorder”), internal
dream behavior is acted out in the waking world. Typically found in men

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

138

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 138

THE EGO TUNNEL

over sixty, RBD is associated with a loss of the muscle atonia that typically accompanies REM sleep. Patients suﬀering from RBD are forced to
act out dramatic and often violent dreams. They will shout or grunt.
They may attempt to strangle their bed partners, set ﬁre to their beds,
jump out of windows, even ﬁre a gun. Later they will recall little or
nothing of this physical activity—unless they fall out of bed or bump
into furniture or injure themselves or someone else and wake up. But
they can usually recall the dreams themselves, which typically involve
such physical activities as ﬁghting, running, chasing or being chased,
and attacking or being attacked. These patients also seem to experience
violent and aggressive dream content more frequently than healthy
subjects do. Obviously, this is a dangerous condition that can lead to
self-inﬂicted injuries and serious sleep deprivation. What we can learn
from it is how the dream body, in normal circumstances, is decoupled
from the physical body. Normally, dreamers are not bodily agents, and
all their behavior is purely internal, simulated behavior. But when motor
inhibition fails, as it does in RBD, internal dream behavior is enacted by
the physical body.
The most interesting feature of ordinary dreams leads to some
deeper philosophical considerations about the nature of consciousness.
The dream tunnel is generated in a very special conﬁguration: During
REM sleep, as noted, there is an output blockade, responsible for the
paralysis of the sleeper, and there is an input blockade, which prevents
(at least to a degree) sensory signals in the sleeper’s environment from
penetrating conscious experience. At the same time, chaotic internal
signals are generated by what are known as PGO waves. They are electrical bursts of neural activity named for the brain areas involved (the
pons, the lateral geniculate nucleus in the hypothalamus, and the occipital primary visual cortex) and are closely related not only to eye movements but also to the processing of visual information.
As the brain tries to understand and interpret this chaotic internal
pattern of signals, it starts telling itself a fairy tale, with the dream ego
playing the leading role. The interesting point is that the dream Ego does
not know that it is dreaming. It does not realize the signals it is turning
into an internal narrative are self-generated stimuli—in philosophical

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 139

Philosophical Psychonautics

139

jargon, this feature of the dream state is a “metacognitive deﬁcit.” The
dream Ego is delusional, lacking insight into the nature of the state it is
itself generating.

LUCID DREA MING
The natural question to ask is if there are any dreams with additional insight, dreams in which the dream self-model has become so strong and
rich that it allows us to understand what is happening. Can one consciously enjoy one’s own internal virtual reality? Is it possible to dream
without the metacognitive deﬁcit? The answer is yes. You can have
dreams in which you are not only aware of the fact that you are dreaming but also possess a complete memory both of your dream life and
your waking life, as well as the phenomenal property of agency on the
levels of attention, thought, and behavior. Such dreams are called lucid
dreams. They are highly interesting—not so much for the sheer fun of
the drama but because they open new ways of investigating the phenomenon of conscious experience. In particular, they help us understand how the various layers of the self-model are constructed and
woven into the dream tunnel.
Dutch psychiatrist Frederik van Eeden, who coined the phrase “lucid
dreaming,” reported the following experience to the Society for Psychical Research in 1913:
In January, 1898 . . . I was able to repeat the observation. . . . I
dreamt that I was lying in the garden before the windows of my
study, and saw the eyes of my dog through the glass pane. I was
lying on my chest and observing the dog very keenly. At the
same time, however, I knew with perfect certainty that I was
dreaming and lying on my back in my bed. And then I resolved
to wake up slowly and carefully and observe how my sensation
of lying on my chest would change to the sensation of lying on
my back. And so I did, slowly and deliberately, and the transition—which I have since undergone many times—is most wonderful. It is like the feeling of slipping from one body into

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

140

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 140

THE EGO TUNNEL
another, and there is distinctly a double recollection of the two
bodies. I remembered what I felt in my dream, lying on my
chest; but returning into the day-life, I remembered also that my
physical body had been quietly lying on its back all the while.
This observation of a double memory I have had many times
since. It is so indubitable that it leads almost unavoidably to the
conception of a dream-body.7

Van Eeden’s “dream-body” is the self-model in the dream state. Lucid
dreams are fascinating because our naive realism—our unawareness of
living our lives in an Ego Tunnel—is temporarily suspended. They are
therefore a promising route of research for solving what I termed the
Reality Problem in our tour of the tunnel in chapter 2. A lucid dream is a
global simulation of a world in which we suddenly become aware that it
is indeed just a simulation. It is a tunnel whose inhabitant begins to realize that he or she actually operates in a tunnel all the time.
Hugh G. Callaway, a British experimenter in out-of-body experiences
who published under the pseudonym Oliver Fox, recorded the following
classic episode, occurring in 1902, when he was a young science student
at the Harley Institute at Southampton:
I dreamed that I was standing on the pavement outside my
home. . . . I was about to enter the house when, on glancing casually at [the pavement] stones, my attention became riveted by
a passing strange phenomenon, so extraordinary that I could
not believe my eyes—they had seemingly all changed their position in the night, and the long sides were parallel to the curb!
Then the solution flashed upon me: though this glorious summer morning seemed as real as real could be, I was dreaming!
With the realization of this fact, the quality of the dream
changed in a manner very difficult to convey to one who has not
had the experience. Instantly, the vividness of life increased a
hundredfold. Never had the sea and sky and trees shone with
such glamorous beauty; even the commonplace houses seemed
alive and mystically beautiful. Never had I felt so absolutely well,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 141

Philosophical Psychonautics

141

so clear-brained, so inexpressibly free! The sensation was exquisite beyond words; but it lasted only a few minutes and I awoke.8

Maybe you’ve had a lucid dream yourself; the phenomenon is not rare. If
not, you can try a number of diﬀerent induction techniques. For instance, you can adopt the habit of performing “reality checks” several
times a day. Each reality check should last at least a minute. It consists in
carefully inspecting your current inner and outer environment for any
indications that this might not be ordinary waking reality. Here is a
checklist that readers interested in exploring the dream tunnel can use
as a guideline.
• Is all the furniture arranged the way it normally is?
• Are the paving stones, the tiles, or the design of the carpet on the
ﬂoor arranged in the same pattern as usual?
• Do objects or persons suddenly appear and disappear, or do they
change their identity?
• Do you know who you are and where you are?
• Do you remember what day of the week it is and when you last
woke up?
• Are there any gaps in your short-term memory of recent events?
• Does your visual attention shift the way it usually does?
• Are you engaging in any unusual physical activities, like ﬂying?
• Are you constantly trying to remember something you know is of
great importance but can’t remember what it is?
• Does your current situation have a metaphoric or symbolic
character, or do you have the feeling of being close to an
important discovery?
If you perform reality checks of this type several times a day, you have a
good chance of eventually becoming a lucid dreamer. By pure habit, you
will one day perform a reality check in a dream—and if you are lucky,
you will correctly realize that you are dreaming.
Other methods of inducing lucid dreams are even more eﬃcient. Try
setting an alarm clock early in the morning and carefully writing down

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

142

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 142

THE EGO TUNNEL

the events of your last dream. Get up, move around for a short period of
time, and then go back to bed. While you are falling asleep, try to rehearse the last sequence of dream events in as much detail as you can.
You may ﬁnd that you can consciously reenter the dream and stay lucid
throughout it.
As an intrepid philosophical psychonaut, I have of course tried to
build devices to do this kind of exploring, involving headphones and tape
loops whispering, “Watch out—this is a dream!” at thirty-minute intervals all night long. I also bought an expensive lucid-dreaming device
called a Nova Dreamer, which looks a bit like the eye masks you sometimes see people wearing on long-distance plane ﬂights. The Nova
Dreamer is activated when your rapid eye movements signal the start of a
dream. After a couple of minutes, it begins submitting mild subliminal
visual stimuli, and you can perceive these soft, red, ring-shaped ﬂashes of
light through your closed eyelids. They are meant to alert you to the fact
that you are dreaming; however, they are more likely to be integrated into
your dream story. Here’s one of my own dreams thus invaded:
I am an astronaut. I have been waiting for this moment for
years. My friend and I are lying on our backs in the Space Shuttle, awaiting takeoff with a mixture of anxiety and great excitement. Deep below our backs, we can feel the rumbling and
rattling of the ignition give way to a thundering roar. Then red
lights start flashing everywhere on the control panel. Suddenly,
every possible alarm system is activated. Someone says, “Something must have gone terribly wrong!” We feel the spaceship
slowly tilting to the side and losing its vertical position while the
roar at our backs gets louder and louder.

Unfortunately, all I ever got out of my expensive lucid-dreaming device
was terrible nightmares—with an interesting twist. In Germany, the
ﬂashing lights of police cars are blue. So what I got from this device was
American nightmares, with American police cars hunting me down and
cornering me, ﬂashing red lights and all. Every two years or so, I give my
Nova Dreamer another try; lately, it has had a diﬀerent eﬀect on me. I

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 143

Philosophical Psychonautics

143

wake up in the morning and the device is gone. If I go looking for it, I ﬁnd
that it has been hurled across the bedroom by some stranger. Apparently
there is someone inside me who does not want to be a philosophical psychonaut or a serious practitioner of ﬁrst-person phenomenological research at all—someone who just wants to sleep.
So what, exactly, is a lucid dream? In a lucid dream, the dreamer
knows that she is currently experiencing a dream and is able to ascribe
this property to herself. If we opt for a strong deﬁnition, another condition is that she also has access to memories of her previous dream and
waking life. Autobiographical memory is fully intact. The dreamer has
full access not only to past conscious experiences in waking life and in
ordinary dreams but also to previously experienced lucid dreams. The
overall level of mental clarity and cognitive insight is at least as high as it
is during normal waking states. A further deﬁning characteristic is that,
according to subjective experience, all ﬁve senses function just as well as
they do during the waking state. Finally, and perhaps most important,
the property of agency is fully realized in the lucid dream. Phenomenologically, the lucid dreamer knows about her freedom of will. Not only
can she direct the focus of attention wherever she likes, but she can also
actually do whatever she wants—ﬂy, walk through walls, or engage in
conversations with dream ﬁgures. The subject of a lucid dream is not a
passive victim lost in a sequence of bizarre episodes but rather is a fullblown agent, capable of selecting from a variety of possible actions.
Full control of one’s attention is an important feature distinguishing
lucid dreams from ordinary dreams. Insight into one’s freedom to act is
also an important criterion of lucid dreams (but is it an insight?). During
what are sometimes called pre-lucid dreams, we frequently become
aware that none of this is real, that this must be a dream, but we remain
passive observers. With the onset of full lucidity, the dreamer often
turns from a passive observer into an agent—someone who takes
charge, moves around, explores and experiments, who deliberately
starts to interact with the dream world and shape it.
My favorite experiment in lucid-dream research was conducted by
Stanford University psychophysiologist Stephen LaBerge and his colleagues more than a quarter of a century ago. It exploited the interesting

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

144

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 144

THE EGO TUNNEL

fact that our conscious self-model is ﬁrmly anchored in the brain in a
fascinating way: There is a direct and reliable relationship between the
gaze shifts reported by lucid dreamers and the eye movements observed
in their sleeping bodies. In the sleep lab, these eye movements can be
recorded using a polygraph. The fact that the movements of the dreameyeballs in the dream-body are directly correlated with the movements
of the physical eyeballs in one’s physical body was used by LaBerge in a
particularly ingenious experiment. Veteran subjects deliberately indicated the initiation of a lucid dream with speciﬁc ocular signals determined before the experiments—that is, by rapidly moving their eyes up
and down. Two such eye shifts would inform the experimenters of the
onset of a lucid dream; four signaled awakening. The polygraphic analysis revealed that the onset of lucidity is typically correlated with the ﬁrst
two minutes of an REM phase, or with short intervals of waking consciousness during an REM phase, or with heightened phasic REM activity (characterized by bursts of eye movements and sometimes by motor
twitches and widespread synchronized activity in speciﬁc thalamocortical networks). Put simply, lucidity seems to occur when there is a brief
and sudden increase of the general cortical level of arousal: All nerve
cells become more active, the result being the sudden availability of
more “computational power,” or capacity for information processing.
With regard to the dream itself, lucidity seems to lead to increased
vividness, heightened fear or stress, the discovery of contradictions
within the dream world, and, of course, the subjective experience of becoming aware of a “dreamlike” or “unreal” quality of reality.
I like these experiments because they are a rare example of transtunnel communication. When the lucid dreamer in the sleep lab emits
eye signals by deliberately moving his or her dream-eyes up and down
and scientists in the waking world read these signals oﬀ their instruments, a multiuser link between the dream tunnel and the waking tunnel is established. Because the gaze shifts performed by the dream-body
are functionally linked to those of the physical body, and because the lucid dreamer is aware of this fact, a bridge connecting the two tunnels is
built. In this experimental setup, information from one type of con-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 145

Philosophical Psychonautics

145

scious reality tunnel can be transmitted to another type, one created by
the brains of other human beings.
We need more good empirical research on lucid dreams. It is plausible to assume that lucidity depends on the degree to which the prefrontal cortex, where the organizing of cognitive and social behaviors
takes place and the so-called executive functions are located, can form a
stable functional link with other brain regions that generate the conscious dream self. The prefrontal cortex is thought to arrange thoughts
and actions in accordance with internal goals. It also has to do with differentiation among conﬂicting thoughts, planning, assessing future
consequences of current activities, predicting outcomes, generating expectations, and the like.
Allan Hobson, a psychiatrist and dream researcher at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center and author of The Dreaming Brain, has
speculated that for lucidity to occur, “the normally deactivated dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) must be reactivated, but not so strongly
as to suppress the pontolimbic signals to it.” This part of the brain may
allow us to refer to ourselves by engaging in reﬂective thought. In the lucid-dream tunnel, this leads to the reestablishment of executive control
and the reemergence of a full-blown agent. If Hobson is right, the moment we consciously think, “My God, I’m dreaming!” may be the moment the self-model of the dream state becomes hooked up to the
prefrontal cortex, making proper reﬂexive self-consciousness possible
again and reestablishing cognitive agency.
Here are some questions for future research: What precisely happens
to the conscious self during the transition from an ordinary dream to a
lucid dream? What are the ﬁne-grained functional diﬀerences between
the dream self-model and the lucid self-model? Could there also be
something like “lucid waking”? And what, exactly, happens during a
false awakening?
As we have seen, false awakenings can happen to all of us. This
brings up another classical philosophical problem, the issue of solipsism
(from Latin: solus, alone, and ipse, self ). How, exactly, can I refute the
skeptical hypothesis that my mind is the only thing that I know to exist?

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

146

2/3/09

9:28 AM

Page 146

THE EGO TUNNEL

How can I exclude the possibility that the external world—and other
conscious minds in particular—cannot be known and might not exist at
all? Finally, here is a little thought experiment in applied tunnel epistemology, introduced and illustrated by a lucid dream reported by the late
German dream researcher Paul Tholey:
I briefly looked back. The person following me did not look like
an ordinary human being; he was as tall as a giant and reminded
me of Rübezahl [a mountain spirit in German legend]. Now it
was fully clear to me that I was undergoing a dream, and with a
great sense of relief I continued running away. Then it suddenly
occurred to me that I did not have to escape but was capable of
doing something else. I remembered my plan of talking to other
persons during the dream. So I stopped running, turned
around, and allowed the pursuer to approach me. Then I asked
him what it actually was that he wanted. His answer was: “How
am I supposed to know?! After all, this is your dream and, moreover, you studied psychology and not me.”14

Imagine that while in the dream tunnel, you suddenly become lucid and
ﬁnd yourself at a major interdisciplinary conference, where dream scientists and dream philosophers are discussing the nature of consciousness:
While they’re standing around during the coffee break, one of
them claims that you do not really exist, because you’re just a
dream figure in your own lucid-dream tunnel, a mere possibility. Amused, you reply, “No, you are all figures in my dream—
just figments of my imagination.” This response is greeted with
laughter, and you notice, too, that colleagues at other tables are
grinning and turning their heads in your direction. “All of this is
happening in my brain!” you insist. “I own the hardware, and
you are all just simulated dream characters in a simulated environment, processed and created by my central nervous system.
It would be easy for me. . .” Here, more laughter interrupts
you—roars of laughter. A young PhD student arrogantly starts

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 147

Philosophical Psychonautics

147

explaining the basic assumptions about the nature of reality
shared by this particular scientific community: No such things
as brains or physical objects ever existed. The contents of consciousness are all there is. So all phenomenal selves are equal.
There is no such thing as an individual “tunnel” in which one
self-model represents the true subject of experience and all
other person-models are just dream figures.

The strange philosophical concept this dream community of scientists
has developed as their background assumption is known as eliminative
phenomenalism. As the slightly overambitious PhD student explains:
“Eliminative phenomenalism is the thesis that physics and the neuroscientiﬁc image of man constitute a radically false theory, a theory so
fundamentally defective that both the principles and the ontology of
that theory will eventually be displaced, rather than smoothly reduced,
by a completed science of pure consciousness.” All reality, accordingly,
is phenomenal reality. The only way you can drop out of this reality is
by making the grandiose (but fundamentally false) assumption that
there actually is an outside world and that you are the subject—that is,
the experiencer—of this phenomenal reality, that there actually is a consciousness tunnel (a wormhole, as they ironically call it), and that it is
your own tunnel. By entertaining this belief, however, you would suddenly become unreal and turn into something even less than a mere
dream ﬁgure yourself: a possible person—exactly what your opponent
claimed at the beginning of the discussion.
“Listen, guys,” you say, in a slightly irritated voice, “I can demonstrate to you that this is my consciousness tunnel, because I can
end this state, and your very existence, at any point in time. A
well-known technique for terminating lucid dreams is to hold
one’s hands up in front of one’s eyes and fix one’s visual attention on them. If I do this, it will interrupt the rapid eye movements in my physical body and thus end the dream state in my
physical brain. I will wake up in the Waking Tunnel. You will
simply cease to exist. Do you want me to show you?” You note

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

148

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 148

THE EGO TUNNEL
that your tone of voice sounds triumphant, but you also note
that the amusement in the eyes of the other scientists and
philosophers has changed to pity. The arrogant PhD student
blurts out again: “But don’t you see that simply falling back into
what you call ‘waking up’ doesn’t prove anything to anybody?
You must demonstrate the truth of your ontological assumptions to this scientific community, on this level of reality. You
cannot decide the question by simply degrading yourself to a
virtual person and disappearing from our level. By waking up,
you will learn nothing new. And you cannot prove anything at
all—certainly not to us, but not to yourself, either. If you want to
humiliate yourself by vanishing into your waking wormhole,
then just go ahead! But the serious pursuit of consciousness research and of philosophical theory of science is something entirely different!”

How would you react? If I had not made the right decision at this point,
I might never have ﬁnished this book. But enough tunnel epistemology
for now.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 149

C H AP TER FI VE APPENDIX
DRE A MING: A CONV ER S AT ION
W IT H ALL AN HOB SON

Allan Hobson is professor of psychiatry at
Harvard Medical School, where he
founded the Laboratory of Neurophysiology in order to study the brain basis of
dreaming.
Working with Dr. Robert McCarley,
Hobson developed the reciprocal interaction model, according to which REM
(rapid eye movement) sleep is generated
by cholinergic brainstem mechanisms,
and the activation-synthesis theory, which views dreaming as the result
of automatic brain activation and the synthesis of chaotic internal signals during sleep. In the course of his extensive experiments with human sleep laboratory data, Hobson invented the Nightcap method of
home-based sleep recording and, with Robert Stickgold, used this
method to characterize conscious states around the clock. Hobson and
Stickgold also developed a new approach to the study of sleep eﬀects on
learning.
Recently, Hobson has integrated his own ideas and ﬁndings with new
data coming from PET and lesion studies of human sleep in a general
model of state-dependent aspects of consciousness. Called AIM, the
149

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

150

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 150

THE EGO TUNNEL

new model maps three dimensions—activation (A), input-output gating
(I), and chemical modulation (M)—to deﬁne a state space through
which the brain-mind travels in a recurrent loop as we wake, sleep, and
dream.
Hobson is the author of many books, including The Dreaming Brain
(1989), Sleep (1995), Consciousness (1999), Dreaming as Delirium: How
the Brain Goes Out of Its Mind (1999), The Dream Drugstore (2001), Out
of Its Mind: Psychiatry in Crisis (2001), and 13 Dreams Freud Never Had:
The New Mind Science (2004).

Metzinger: What exactly is special about consciousness in the dream
state, compared to consciousness in wakefulness and non-REM sleep?
Hobson: Dream consciousness is more intense, more single-minded,
more elaborate, and more bizarre than consciousness in waking.
Hence, it can reasonably be viewed as the most autocreative state of
the brain-mind. It is also the most psychosis-like state of normal
consciousness. Because its neurobiology is so well known, its study
oﬀers us a unique scientiﬁc opportunity to understand ourselves
better in both health and disease.
Metzinger: And what exactly is the relationship between REM sleep and
dreaming?
Hobson: The correlation is quantitative, not qualitative. Dreamlike
mental activity is also correlated with sleep onset (stage I) and with
late-night sleep (stage II), but at all times of the night or day, the
correlation is highest in REM. As for the actual relationship, my hypothesis is that dreaming is our subjective awareness of our brain
activation in any state of sleep. Activation is highest in REM sleep.
So is dreaming. I think that dreaming and REM sleep are our subjective and objective references to the same fundamental process of
the brain-mind. I am a monist, through and through. How about
you?
Metzinger: Sure—I have always liked philosophers like Spinoza, Bertrand
Russell, or Herbert Feigl, who were neutral monists and thought that
the distinction between physical and psychological states is actually

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 151

Philosophical Psychonautics

151

quite superﬁcial and rather uninteresting. For us philosophers, the
more important problem, of course, is what precisely “through and
through” means. But right now, you are the one that has to answer difﬁcult questions! So, how do you explain the relationship between
chaotic dream content, generated by the brainstem, and the more
nonrandom and seemingly meaningful aspects of dreaming?
Hobson: Be careful, Thomas, or you will fall into the “either/or” trap
that has swallowed up so many of our distinguished colleagues. The
answer is “both/and.” REM sleep is generated by the brainstem,
while dreaming is the subjective experience of the brainstem’s activation of the forebrain in REM sleep. The REM generation process
has many chaotic features, which the forebrain tries its best to integrate into a coherent story. But the forebrain is also in a diﬀerent
state than it is in waking, which makes its job more diﬃcult. The
forebrain does the best it can under diﬃcult circumstances.
Whether you think it does well or not so well depends on whether
you think the cup is half empty or half full. Both are true.
Metzinger: Which parts of the human brain are absolutely necessary for
dreaming? Without which parts is it impossible to dream?
Hobson: The second question has empirical evidence contributing to an
answer, but the ﬁrst question is much more interesting and much
more complex. Unfortunately, it cannot be answered scientiﬁcally.
Take the second question ﬁrst. The neuropsychologist Mark
Solms asked some three hundred stroke patients whether they had
noticed any change in their dreaming after their strokes. Patients reported a complete cessation of dreaming if their stroke damaged
either the parietal operculum or the deep frontal white matter.
These claims were particularly interesting, because these same brain
regions were selectively activated in PET studies of REM sleep. Another ﬁnding of interest is the report of dream cessation after prefrontal lobotomy, which Solms discovered in the literature of the
1940s and 1950s.
On their face, these ﬁndings suggest that dreaming depends upon
the brain’s capacity to integrate emotional and sensory data when
activated oﬄine. But of course this doesn’t answer the ﬁrst question

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

152

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 152

THE EGO TUNNEL

at all. Many other brain regions are likely to be equally essential to
dreaming. For example, the visual system must be involved—and,
indeed, Solms’s patients reported the loss of visual imagery in their
dreams if their strokes aﬀected the occipital cortex. Presumably, the
loss of dreaming is an example of what Norman Geschwind called
disconnection syndrome. In other words, the damaged areas are
cerebral crossroads which, when damaged, prevent other parts of
the brain from interacting properly. The important role of the brainstem is unlikely to be revealed by this technique, since lesions large
enough to impede dreaming are likely to be fatal or lead to unresponsive vegetative states.
There are several problems with this approach to dream science.
The ﬁrst is that the answer to question two does not answer question one. It is possible, for example, to imagine that Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas may be quite important to the confabulatory quality of
dreaming, but this possibility cannot be tested if the patient has lost
his ability to give dream reports! Furthermore, it is important to
point out that all of Solms’s data deal with dream reporting, which
cannot be equated with dreaming. In fact, most of us have little or
no memory of our dreams.
In Solms’s studies and in the earlier works of [Cristiano] Violani
and [F.] Dorrichi and of [M. J.] Farah and [M. S.] Greenberg, which
reached similar conclusions about the parietal operculum, there was
no eﬀort made to record the patients’ sleep or to wake them up to
elicit dream reports. These controls are important and yet to be performed. Solms and others are to be congratulated for opening up the
neuropsychological study of dreaming. We look forward to learning
more from this approach. For the present, all we can say is that
dreaming depends on the selective activation and deactivation of
many brain regions, including those which, when damaged, lead to
the failure to report dreams.
Metzinger: What do you think was most likely the evolutionary function of dreaming, and when did it ﬁrst develop?
Hobson: Regarding evolution and the functional advantages of having a
brain that can dream, I have both conservative and speculative

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 153

Philosophical Psychonautics

153

views. The conservative position is that there is no evidence that
dreaming itself serves any purpose whatsoever. That is to say, neither the conscious awareness of dreams while they are occurring nor
recall of such awareness on awakening from sleep is likely or has
been shown to be useful. I think we must take seriously Owen Flanagan’s suggestion that dreams are the spandrels of sleep.
At its most extreme, the argument says that dream consciousness
is an epiphenomenon, which humans and other animals can do just
as well without. The most cogent reason for thinking this may be
true is the all-but-complete amnesia that we have for our dreams. If
dream recall were adaptive, surely we would have more of it! But
taking this position about dreaming as a conscious experience does
not negate a healthy, speculative interest in the functional signiﬁcance of having a brain that can self-activate in sleep. Such a brain
could be doing many things. These include the already known enhancement of motor learning, the regulation of dietary and thermal
calories, and the improvement in the immune functions. I don’t have
to be aware of those functions, even if they are essential to my survival and my reproductive success.
Here we are at the nub of a number of critical philosophical
questions, including the common confusion of brain activity and
awareness. Our conscious awareness during waking is an obvious
adaptive advantage, but our conscious awareness during sleep may
not be. It may even be an adaptive advantage not to remember
dream content. Allowing for some therapists’ assertion that dreaming is the royal road to the unconscious, it is still possible to ask,
“Who wants to go there?” Those who do are free to try, but I myself
see no adaptive advantage to dream recall and dream interpretation,
even though I myself indulge, with great pleasure, in both sports.
My own special theory is that dreaming is a highly distinctive
form of conscious awareness that can be used to better understand
the brain activity that leads to consciousness, whether it be in waking
or in sleep. As Gerald Edelman and Giulio Tononi have pointed out,
it is the vast thalamocortical system that must be activated to produce consciousness. In waking and in sleep, this system is activated

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

154

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 154

THE EGO TUNNEL

by the brainstem, but the chemical modulation accompanying the
activation is very diﬀerent in the two states. The contributions of
other structures, like the limbic system and the modulatory systems
of the brainstem, are very signiﬁcant in that they “color” consciousness as well as activate it.
Humans and most other mammals have brains that can selfactivate in sleep, when environmental conditions such as cold and
darkness do not favor waking behavior, and it is this capacity, not
the awareness of it, that is signiﬁcant for evolutionary success.
Metzinger: What is known today about the phylogenetic manifestation
of the sleep-wake cycle? How did it come about in our ancestors?
And how is that manifestation related to consciousness?
Hobson: The answer is that a lot is known! Without going into elaborate
details, it can be safely said that the fully developed sleep-wake cycle, with alternative phases of NREM and REM sleep, is an adaptation reserved to homeothermic animals—namely, mammals and
birds that regulate their body temperature. What is the adaptive link
between homeothermia and sleep? Again, the answer is simple.
Keeping brain temperature constant despite enormous ﬂuctuations
of environmental temperature guarantees reliable brain function in a
wide variety of environmental contexts. In other words, temperature
control and brain function are tightly linked, and sleep secures that
link.
With respect to the consciousness angle, I follow Edelman, who
refers to primary consciousness—that is, perception, emotion, and
memory—and secondary consciousness, which is awareness of
awareness and the ability to describe it. Secondary consciousness,
which depends upon language and other sophisticated abstractions,
is exclusively human. Primary consciousness is widespread among
mammals and could even be present in some submammalian
species. Unfortunately, these assertions can never be more than intelligent guesses, because no subhuman animal can communicate its
subjective experience verbally. Animal-rights activists, like right-tolife agitators, are quite right in claiming that many subhuman and

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 155

Philosophical Psychonautics

155

immature animals are, to a limited but signiﬁcant degree, conscious.
If we are to take their lives or cause them pain, we had better have a
strong moral reason for doing so. And we do. It is the reduction of
human suﬀering. I am an unapologetic human supremacist. Just as I
take animal and vegetable life to survive, I take it to promote the
quality of that life.
Metzinger: Could we build a machine that dreams but never wakes? Are
there animals that dream but do not enjoy waking consciousness?
Hobson: Again, it’s easier to answer the second part of the question.
Given the limitations to scientiﬁc knowledge I’ve emphasized, the answer is no. If an animal can activate its brain in sleep, it has that capacity in waking also. So it stands to reason—but it is only reason—
that animals that have (necessarily limited) dream consciousness
also enjoy consciousness in waking. As for the ﬁrst part, a dream
machine can already be designed, but there is a state-of-the-art limitation that cripples the program. That limitation is the problem of
generating linguistic statements from a biographical database. The
last time I consulted with language specialist Roger Shanks, he told
me that this crucial piece was still missing from the AI (artiﬁcial intelligence) puzzle. Activating perception and emotion modules
poses no problem, and making them responsive to or independent
of input and output can be done, as John Antrobus of CUNY has already shown. Any dream machine that would now be designed
would likely have a wake-state mode of operation, because we’re interested in the similarities and diﬀerences between those two states
and how they are generated. But it’s theoretically possible to develop
a dream-only machine.
The fact that—as far as we know—evolution has not yet produced
any dream-only animals suggests a deep meaningful and functional
link between the waking and dreaming states of consciousness and
brain activity. It is possible to argue, as I’ve already pointed out, that
the brain is activated oﬄine to beneﬁt the brain online and vice versa,
without postulating a causal link between the conscious awareness of
the two states.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

156

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 156

THE EGO TUNNEL

Metzinger: Cultural as opposed to biological evolution certainly gives a
place to dream content, but whether that place is truly adaptive is
still questionable.
Hobson: Many cultures have accorded prophetic meaning to dreams.
The widely shared view of all such prophets is that dreaming is a
message, in code, from important external or internal agents and
needs decoding. Such decoding is seen by the practicing cultures as
not only valid but also determinant of important conscious personal
and political decisions. The dream sorcerers helped kings decide
whether or not to go to war. Should modern psychoanalysts help individuals decide, say, whether to pursue a relationship further or
not, based on the patients’ dreams?
One problem with this approach is the religious belief that there
is some hidden truth that only dreams can reveal. Thus, one mystery, dreaming, is used to explain another, decision making. There is
no evidence that this belief is justiﬁed. As Adolf Grünbaum has
shown in his discussion of the Tally Argument, customer satisfaction cannot be used as a scientiﬁc warrant for the truth-value of a
prophetic assertion—or a dream-interpretation scheme.
It might well be that dreaming reveals one’s cognitive repertoires
in dealing with emotion, but that is not particularly diﬃcult to discern in waking. The stronger claim, by psychoanalysis, that dream
interpretation reveals hidden links between cognition and emotion,
has no scientiﬁc proof whatsoever.
Metzinger: I am particularly interested in the transition between ordinary dreams and lucid dreams. What are the necessary and suﬃcient conditions in the brain for lucidity to occur? What exactly is
the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex?
Hobson: The occasional awareness that one is in fact dreaming is an extremely informative detail of modern dream science. The fact that
such insight can be cultivated thickens the plot considerably. Taken
together, the data suggest that the conscious state accompanying
brain activation in sleep is both plastic and causal. It is plastic because self-reﬂective awareness occasionally does arise sponta-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 157

Philosophical Psychonautics

157

neously, and because with practice its incidence—and its power—
can be increased. It is causal because lucidity can be ampliﬁed to
command scene changes in dreams and even to command awakening, the better to remember, and enjoy, occasional dream-plot control. My position about lucidity is that it is real, it is powerful, and it
is informative.
With respect to the third point, we already know, thanks to
Stephen LaBerge, that sleep lucidity occurs in REM sleep, and we can
predict that during lucid REM sleep dreaming, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, or DLPFC, which is selectively deactivated, may become reactivated so that the ponto-thalamical show of dreams comes
under conscious control. I believe that this hypothesis, which is
testable, contains the answer to many fundamental neurobiological
and philosophical questions, such as the relationship of brain activity
to consciousness and the causality of consciousness—free will.
If, as I predict, the DLPFC does reactivate during lucid dreaming
while the ponto-thalamocortical dream show continues, then Daniel
Dennett’s despised Cartesian theater does exist. One part of the
brain—the seat of the executive ego—wakes up and watches, or even
directs, the dream show thrown up on the consciousness screen by
the activation of the pons, thalamus, cortex, and limbic system. Eat
your heart out, Daniel Dennett!
The evanescence and fragility of the lucid dream state testify to
its unlikelihood and its nonadaptive nature. The lucid dream also
demands the special attention that all such revelatory rarities deserve. Unfortunately, it is unlikely to get that attention. The reason is
that the experiments will be diﬃcult to perform and expensive to
underwrite. This would be a barrier to many more trivial exercises
in cognitive neuroscience, but lucid dreaming has a bad name because (a) many scientists still do not believe it is real, (b) many do
not trust LaBerge’s data about its occurrence in REM sleep, and (c)
many will not go near the lucid-dream problem, because they fear
being labeled as cranks or nuts! You, Thomas Metzinger, should easily be able to understand this fear.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

158

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 158

THE EGO TUNNEL

Metzinger: Well, I certainly know what you’re talking about. The right
strategy would be not to declare such areas taboo but to invade
them with open-minded, unbiased scientiﬁc rationality. The problem in the background, of course, is that if we want to be realistic,
we also have to admit that the newly emerging ﬁeld of consciousness research is not populated by philosophical saints interested in
the pursuit of self-knowledge as such. It is driven at least as
strongly by what I sometimes call the Teﬂon-coated Darwin machines of Academia—brute individual career interests. Scientists,
of course, are self-sustaining, risk-avoiding Ego Machines as well.
Sad to say, the ﬁeld of lucid-dream research is not moving well at
this time.
Hobson: In my opinion—which is not widely shared, even by Thomas
Metzinger—we need to work on a science of subjectivity. In order to
be able to utilize ﬁrst-person data, we need to be both cautious and
versatile. Reports of conscious experience must be collected from
many individuals in many states. These reports must be rigorously
quantiﬁed, and the states with which they are associated must be
objectiﬁed. The brain states must be more fully characterized using
a full panoply of techniques, including PET and MRI in humans, cellular and molecular probes in animals, behavioral tests in humans,
and more.
Who will do all these things? As far as I know, I’m the only person in the world even to have tried. I say this with all due modesty
and even sincere self-deprecation. I am proud of my accomplishments, but I can easily understand the criticism of my work as a
fool’s errand. At the root, the approach I advocate is in the service of
the emergentist hypothesis of great scientists like Roger Sperry and
great philosophers like William James. Such thinkers are few and far
between.
More common, and far more handsomely rewarded, are those
who dig deep discovering molecular widgets within and between
nerve cells. Such discoveries are truly wondrous, but they will never
lead to an understanding of conscious experience. Interestingly,
even such well-known colleagues as Sigmund Freud worked within

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 159

Philosophical Psychonautics

159

this ill-fated reductionist paradigm. Here I use the term “reductionist” in its popular sense, implying eliminative materialism.
Metzinger: Why are you interested in philosophy? What contributions
from the humanities are you looking for?
Hobson: I’m interested in philosophy because I believe it is a foundational discipline—along with psychology and physiology—of cognitive neuroscience as it tries to ﬁgure out how to study consciousness.
I myself try to “do” philosophy, but I need help. That’s why I turn to
people like you, Owen Flanagan, and even David Chalmers. In general, I get positive responses from philosophers. They’re genuinely
interested in my eﬀorts and they generously share their insights with
me. You’re no exception.
Regarding the second part of your question, I want philosophers
and other humanists to realize that the scientiﬁc study of brainmind states constitutes one of the greatest challenges and opportunities to better understand ourselves that has ever been presented
to us in our long intellectual history. There is room for many disciplines in this eﬀort, which is as simple and broad-based as it is ambitious. To bring more coworkers up to speed is my own private
goal. We need all the help we can get. I even believe that brainmind science is one of the humanities.
Metzinger: So, today, is there still any point in psychoanalysis, or is it
just a lot of hot air? What do you think of Solms’s arguments?
Hobson: Sigmund Freud was ﬁfty-percent right and a hundred-percent
wrong! So is Mark Solms, but for diﬀerent reasons. Freud was right
to be interested in dreams and what dreaming could tell us about
the human psyche, and especially its emotional aspects. His dream
theory is now obsolete, but its errors are still being promoted by
such psychoanalysts as Mark Solms.
Here’s a checklist of Freudian hypotheses and the corresponding
alternatives oﬀered by modern neurobiology:
(1) Instigation of Dreaming.
Freud: release of unconscious wishes.
Neurobiology: brain activation in sleep.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

160

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 160

THE EGO TUNNEL

(2) Characteristics of Dreaming.
(a) Bizarreness.
Freud: disguise and censorship of unconscious wishes.
Neurobiology: chaotic, bottom-up activation processes.
(b) Strong emotion.
Freud: Can’t explain that one!
Neurobiology: selective activation of limbic lobe.
(c) Amnesia.
Freud: repression.
Neurobiology: aminergic demodulation.
(d) Hallucinations.
Freud: regression to the sensory side.
Neurobiology: activation of REMs and PGO waves.
(e) Delusion, loss of self-reﬂective awareness.
Freud: ego dissolution.
Neurobiology: selective deactivation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
(3) Function of Dreaming.
Freud: guardian of sleep.
Neurobiology: epiphenomenon, but REM sleep essential to life
via enhancement of thermoregulatory and immune functions.
As we say in America, “Ya pays your money and ya takes your
choice!” I choose neurobiology. How about you? As for Solms, he
is nothing but a very smart psychoanalyst who wants to save Freud
from the ashbin. His arguments, based on his important neuropsychological work, are weak. He has given up on disguise/censorship,
but wants to resuscitate wish fulﬁllment. While it is true that dreams
often do represent our desires, they are rarely truly unconscious,
and dreams also represent our fears, a fact Freud could never explain. So what is left after Solms has given up disguise/censorship
and only weakly deﬁned wish fulﬁllment? Not much!
Solms attacks my activation-synthesis hypothesis of dreaming
because of the observed dissociation between REM sleep and

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 161

Philosophical Psychonautics

161

dreaming. As I have repeatedly pointed out, the correlation between
REM sleep and dreaming is quantitative, not qualitative. The brain
begins to shift from waking to REM sleep as soon as sleep begins.
This means that the probability of dreaming begins to rise at sleep
onset, to persist even in deep NREM sleep, when brain activation is
still at eighty percent of waking levels, and to increase to its peak in
REM sleep.
Why, then, do I say that Freud and Solms are ﬁfty-percent right?
Because dreams are not entirely nonsensical. They do make salient
interrogations between emotions and cognition. Hence, they are
worth reporting, discussing, and even interpreting, in terms of what
they tell us about our emotions and how they inﬂuence our thoughts
and our behavior. But they do this directly and openly, not via the
symbolic transformation of forbidden wishes from the unconscious.
The good news is that you don’t have to pay—or even leave your
house—if you want to use dreams to explore your emotional life.
You need only to pay attention, keep a journal, and reﬂect on the
messages from your emotional brain, the limbic lobe. If you’re a scientist, like me, you can do much more. You can use dreams and
dreaming to build a new theory of consciousness.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 162

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 163

six


THE EMPATHIC EGO

Have you ever watched a child who has just learned to walk run toward
a desired object much too quickly and then trip and fall on his face? The
child lifts his head, turns, and searches for his mother. He does so with a
completely empty facial expression, showing no kind of emotional response. He looks into his mother’s face to ﬁnd out what has happened.
How bad was it, really? Should I cry or should I laugh?
Toddlers do not yet have an autonomous self-model (though probably none of us has a self-model that is truly independent from others). In
such small children, we observe an important fact about the nature of
our own phenomenal Ego: It has social correlates as well as neural correlates. The toddler does not yet know how he should feel; therefore he
looks at his mother’s face in order to deﬁne the emotional content of his
own conscious self-experience. His self-model does not yet have a stable
emotional layer to which he could attend and, as it were, register the
severity of what just happened. The fascinating point is that here are
two biological organisms that just a few months ago, before being physically separated at birth, were one. Their Egos, their phenomenal selfmodels, are still intimately coupled on the functional level. When the
toddler gazes at his mother and starts to smile in relief, there is a sudden
transition in his PSM. Suddenly, he discovers that he didn’t hurt himself
163

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

164

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 164

THE EGO TUNNEL

at all, that the only thing that happened to him was a big surprise. An
ambiguity is resolved: Now he knows how he feels.
There are kinds of self-experience that an isolated being could never
have. Many layers of our self-model require social correlates; more than
that, they are frequently created by some sort of social interaction. It is
plausible to assume that if a child does not learn to activate the corresponding parts of his emotional Ego during a certain crucial period of
his psychological development, he will not be able to have those feelings
as an adult. We can enter certain regions in our phenomenal-state space
only with the help of other human beings. In a more general sense, certain types of subjective experiences—interpersonal connectedness,
trust, friendship, self-conﬁdence—may be more or less available to each
of us. The degree to which individuals have access to their emotional
states varies. The same is true of their capacity for empathy and the ease
with which they can read the minds of other human beings. Ego Tunnels
develop in a social environment, and the nature of this environment determines to what extent one Ego Tunnel can resonate with other Ego
Tunnels.
So far, we have been concerned only with how the world and the self
appear in the tunnel created by the brain. But what about other selves?
How can other agents with other goals, other thinkers of thoughts,
other feeling selves, become parts of one’s own inner reality? We can
also express this question in philosophical terms. At the beginning of
this book, we asked how a ﬁrst-person perspective can emerge in the
brain. The answer was that it does so through the creation of the Ego
Tunnel. Now we can ask, What about the second-person perspective? Or
the “we,” the ﬁrst-person-plural perspective? How does the conscious
brain manage to get from the “I” to the “you” and the “we”? The
thoughts, goals, feelings, and needs of other living beings in our environment constitute part of our own reality; therefore, it is vital to understand how our brains were able to represent and create not just the
inward perspective of the Ego Tunnel but also a world containing multiple Egos and multiple perspectives. Perhaps we will discover that large
parts of the ﬁrst-person perspective did not simply emerge in the brain

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 165

The Empathic Ego

165

but were in part causally enabled by the social context we all found ourselves in from the very beginning.
The self-model theory holds that certain new layers of consciousness, unique to the self-model of Homo sapiens, made the transition
from biological to cultural evolution possible. This process started on an
unconscious, automatic level in our brains, and its roots reach far down
into the animal kingdom. There is an evolutionary continuity to such
high-level social phenomena as the unique human capacity for consciously acknowledging others as rational subjects and moral persons.
In chapter 2, I pointed out that in the history of ideas, the concept of
“consciousness” was intimately related to possession of a “conscience”—
the higher-order ability to assess the moral value of your lower-order
mental states or your behavior. What kind of self-model do you need in
order to become such a moral agent? The answer could have to do with
the progression from a mental representation of the ﬁrst-personsingular perspective to that of the ﬁrst-person plural, along with the
ability to represent mentally what the beneﬁts (or risks) of a particular
action would be for the collective as a whole. You become a moral agent
by taking the coherence and stability of your group into account. In this
way, the evolution of morals may have had a lot to do with an organism’s
ability to distance itself mentally from a representation of its individual
interests and consciously and explicitly to represent principles of group
selection, even if this involved self-damaging behavior. Recall that the
beautiful early philosophical theories of consciousness-as-conscience
rested on installing an ideal observer in your mind. I believe the human
self-model was successful because it installed your social group as an
ideal observer in your mind, and to a much stronger degree than was the
case in any other primate brain. This created a dense causal linkage between global group-control and global self-control—a new kind of ownership, as it were.
Investigators of these phenomena will have to look at chimpanzees
and macaques, at swarms of ﬁsh and ﬂocks of birds, and maybe even at
ant colonies. They will also have to look at the way infants imitate their
parents’ facial expressions. Intersubjectivity started deep down in the

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

166

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 166

THE EGO TUNNEL

realms of biological behavior coordination, in the motor regions of the
brain and the unconscious layers of the Ego. Intersubjectivity is anchored in intercorporality.

SOCIA L NEUROSCIENCE:
CA NONICA L NEURONS A ND MIRROR NEURONS
Sociological and biological approaches to human consciousness have
traditionally been treated as antagonistic to each other, or at least mutually exclusive. But today, in the new discipline of social neuroscience,
the assumption is that a multilevel integrative analysis may be required
and that a common scientiﬁc language, grounded in the structure and
function of the brain, can contribute to it. The self-model theory is an
attempt to develop exactly this type of language.
It has been known since the 1980s that there is a particularly interesting class of neurons in an area called F5 in the ventral premotor region
of the monkey brain. These neurons are part of the unconscious selfmodel; they code body movements in a highly abstract way. Giacomo
Rizzolatti, a professor of human physiology at the University of Parma
and a pioneer in this exciting ﬁeld of research, uses the concept of a
“motor vocabulary” that consists of complex inner images of actions as a
whole. Words in the monkey’s motor vocabulary might be “reach,”
“grasp,” “tear,” or “hold.” The interesting aspect of this discovery is that
there is a speciﬁc part of the brain that describes the monkey’s—and our
own—actions in a holistic manner. This description includes the goals
of the actions and the temporal pattern in which the actions unfold. The
actions are portrayed as relations between an agent and the target object (a piece of fruit, say) of his action.
Now we know that human beings, too, possess something similar.
From a neurocomputational perspective, this system in our brains
makes sense: By developing an inner vocabulary for possible actions, we
reduce the immense space of possibilities to a small number of stereotypical body movements. This allows us, for instance, to perform the
same grasping movement in widely diﬀering situations (recall the Alien
Hand syndrome of chapter 4).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 167

The Empathic Ego

167

One of the most fascinating features of these so-called canonical
neurons is that they also respond to the visual perception of objects in
our environment. Our brain does not simply register a chair, a teacup,
an apple; it immediately represents the seen object as what I could do
with it—as an aﬀordance, a set of possible behaviors. This is something I
could sit on, this is something I could hold in my hands, this is something I could throw. While we’re seeing an object, we are also unconsciously swimming in a sea of possible behaviors. As it turns out, the
traditional philosophical distinction between perception and action is
an artiﬁcial one. In reality, our brains employ a common coding: Everything we perceive is automatically portrayed as a factor in a possible interaction between ourselves and the world. A new medium is created,
blending action and perception into a novel, uniﬁed representational format. The second fascinating discovery about canonical neurons is that
you also use them for self-representation. The motor vocabulary is part
of the unconscious self-model, because it describes the goal-directed
movements of one’s body. The unconscious precursors of the phenomenal Ego in our brain thus play an essential and central role in our perception of the world around us.
In the 1990s, researchers discovered another group of neurons.
Also a part of area F5, they ﬁre not just when monkeys perform objectdirected actions, such as grasping a peanut, but also when they observe
others performing the same type of action. Because these neurons respond to actions performed by others, they are termed mirror neurons.
They are activated when another agent is observed using objects in a
purposeful way. Thus, we are matching the bodily behaviors we observe in others with our own internal motor vocabulary. This action/observation matching system helps us understand something we
could never understand using our sensory organs alone—that other beings in our environment pursue goals. We use our own unconscious
self-model to put ourselves in the shoes of others, as it were. We use
our own “motor ideas” to understand someone else’s actions by directly
mapping them onto our own inner repertoire, by automatically triggering an inner image of what our goal would be if our body also moved
that way. The conscious experience of understanding another human

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

168

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 168

THE EGO TUNNEL

being, the subjective feeling that pops up in the Ego Tunnel when we intuitively grasp what others’ goals are and what is going on in their
minds, is the direct result of these unconscious processes.
The conscious self is thus not only a window into the internal workings of one’s own Ego but also a window into the social world. It is a
two-way window: It elevates to the level of global availability the unconscious and automatic processes that organisms constantly use to represent one another’s behavior. This is how these processes become part of
the Ego Tunnel, an element of our subjective reality. They lead to an
enormous expansion and enrichment of our inner simulation of the
world. As soon as our brains are able to represent not only events but
also actions—that is, goal-directed events caused by other beings—we
are not alone anymore. Others exist, with minds of their own. The fact
that more than one Ego Tunnel might exist in the world is now reﬂected
in our own tunnel. We can develop our conscious-action ontology, and
we can put it to use by sharing it with others.
A considerable body of evidence using a variety of neuroimaging
techniques shows that the mirror-neuron system exists not just in monkeys but in humans as well. However, it appears that the system in humans is much more generalized and does not depend on concrete
eﬀector-object interactions; consequently, it can represent a much
greater variety of actions than it does in monkeys. In particular, researchers have now discovered mirror-neuron systems that seem to
achieve similar eﬀects for emotions and for pain and other bodily sensations. When human test subjects are shown pictures of sad faces, for example, they subsequently tend to rate themselves as sadder than they
were before—and after being shown happy faces they tend to rate themselves as happier. Converging empirical data show that when we observe
other human beings expressing emotions, we simulate them with the
help of the same neural networks that are active when we feel or express
these emotions ourselves. For instance, certain regions in the insular
cortex are activated when subjects are exposed to a disgusting smell,
and the same regions are active when we see an expression of disgust on
another person’s face. A common representation of the emotional state
of disgust is activated in our brains whether we experience it ourselves

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 169

The Empathic Ego

169

or observe it in another individual. Parallel observations in the amygdala
have been made for fear. It is interesting to note that our ability to recognize a particular feeling in another human being can be weakened or
switched oﬀ by blocking the relevant parts of the mirror-neuron system.
It is believed, for example, that certain areas in the ventral striatum of
the basal ganglia are necessary in recognizing anger; patients with damage to this area show impairment in identifying aggression signals emitted by others. If these areas are blocked pharmacologically (by
interfering with dopamine metabolism), subjects can recognize other
emotions but can no longer recognize anger. Similar observations have
been made for pain. Recent fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) experiments show that areas in the anterior cingulate cortex and
the interior insular cortex are active when we experience pain but also
when we observe someone else experiencing pain. Interestingly, only
the emotional part of the pain system is activated; the part associated
with the purely sensory aspect of pain is not. This makes perfect sense,
because the sensory aspect is exactly what we cannot share with anyone
else: We cannot share the cutting, throbbing, or burning sensory quality
of pain, but we can feel empathy with regard to the emotions it causes.
Other neuroimaging experiments have demonstrated that a similar
principle exists for other bodily sensations. Certain higher levels of the
somatosensory cortex are activated both when subjects observe others
being touched and when they are touched themselves. Again, the immediate sensory quality associated with the activation of the primary somatosensory cortex cannot be shared, but a higher level in the bodily
Ego is active regardless of whether we are being touched or just observing someone being touched. There seems to be an underlying principle
uniting these new empirical discoveries: Certain layers of our self-model
function as a bridge to the social domain, because they can directly map
abstract inner descriptions of what is going on in ourselves onto those of
what goes on in other people.
Of course, intersubjectivity is not only about the body and emotions. Thinking plays a role as well. Reason-based forms of empathy
appear to involve yet other parts of the brain—speciﬁcally, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Still, the discovery of mirror neurons helps us to

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

170

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 170

THE EGO TUNNEL

understand that empathy is a natural phenomenon, acquired step by
step in the course of our biological evolution. First, we developed the
self-model, because we had to integrate our sensory perceptions with
our bodily behavior. Then this self-model became conscious, and the
phenomenal self-model was born into the Ego Tunnel, allowing us to
achieve global control of our bodies in a much more selective and ﬂexible manner. This was the step from being an embodied natural system
that has and uses an internal image of itself as a whole to a system that,
in addition, consciously experiences this fact. The next evolutionary
step was what Vittorio Gallese, Rizzolatti’s colleague at Parma and one
of the leading researchers in the ﬁeld, has called embodied simulation.
In order to understand the feelings and goals of other human beings, we
use our own body-model in the brain to simulate them.
As recent neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings show, this process also cuts across
the border between the unconscious and the conscious. A considerable
part of this constant mirroring activity happens outside the Ego Tunnel,
and thus we have no subjective experience of it. But from time to time,
when we deliberately attend to other people or analyze social situations,
the conscious self-model is involved as well; in particular, as noted, we
can somehow directly comprehend, almost perceive, what somebody
else is up to. Often, we “just know” what the purpose of the other person’s action is and what his likely emotional state is. We use the same
internal resources that make us aware of our own goal states to discover
automatically that others are goal-directed entities themselves and not
just other moving objects. We can experience them as Egos because we
experience ourselves as Egos. Whenever successful social understanding and empathy are achieved, we share a common representation: of
one and the same goal state in two diﬀerent Ego Tunnels. Social cognition has now become tractable to empirical neuroscience on the level of
single-cell recordings—showing us not only how Ego Tunnels started to
resonate with each other but also how complex cooperation and communication between self-conscious organisms were able to evolve and
lay the foundations for cultural evolution.
My idea is that social cognition rests on what is sometimes called an
exaptation. Adaptation led to an integrated body-model in the brain

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 171

The Empathic Ego

171

and to the phenomenal self-model. Then the existing neural circuitry
was “exapted” for another form of intelligence: It suddenly proved useful in tackling a diﬀerent set of problems. This process began with loworder motor resonance; then, second- and third-order embodiment
led to embodied simulation as a brand-new tool in developing social
intelligence. Like everything else in evolution, this process was driven
by chance. There was no purpose behind it, but it eventually led us
where we are today—to the formation of intelligent, scientiﬁc communities peopled by conscious agents trying to understand this very
process itself.
The new emerging general picture is inspiring: We are all constantly
swimming in an unconscious sea of intercorporality, permanently mirroring one another with the aid of various unconscious components and
precursors of the phenomenal Ego. Long before conscious, high-level
social understanding arrived on the scene, and long before language
evolved and philosophers developed complicated theories about what it
takes for one human being to acknowledge another as a person and a rational individual, we were already bathed in the waters of implicit, bodily intersubjectivity. Few great social philosophers of the past would
have thought that social understanding had anything to do with the premotor cortex, and that “motor ideas” would play such a central role in
the emergence of social understanding. Who could have expected that
shared thought would depend upon shared “motor representations”?
Or that the functional aspects of the human self-model that are necessary for the development of social consciousness are nonconceptual,
prerational, and pretheoretical? The ﬁrst inklings of these ideas came at
the end of the nineteenth and the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century,
when there were numerous attempts in experimental psychology to better understand so-called ideomotor phenomena. Philosopher Theodor
Lipps wrote about Einfühlung (empathy) in 1903—that is, the ability, as
he put it, to “feel yourself in an object.” He had already spoken of “inner
imitation” and of “organic feelings.” For him, objects of empathy could
be not only the movements or postures we perceive in other human beings but also objects of art, architecture, and even visual illusions. He
held that aesthetic pleasure was “objectiﬁed”—that is, “the object is ego

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

172

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 172

THE EGO TUNNEL

and thereby the ego object.”  Social psychologists began talking about
concepts such as “virtual body movements” and “motor mimicry” or
“motor infection” decades ago.
From a philosophical perspective, the discovery of mirror neurons is
exciting because it gave us an idea of how motor primitives could have
been used as semantic primitives: that is, how meaning could be communicated between agents. Thanks to our mirror neurons, we can consciously experience another human being’s movements as meaningful.
Perhaps the evolutionary precursor of language was not animal calls but
gestural communication. The transmission of meaning may initially
have grown out of the unconscious bodily self-model and out of motor
agency, based, in our primate ancestors, on elementary gesturing.
Sounds may only later have been associated with gestures, perhaps with
facial gestures—such as scowling, wincing, or grinning—that already
carried meaning. Still today, the silent observation of another human being grasping an object is immediately understood, because, without symbols or thought in between, it evokes the same motor representation in
the parieto-frontal mirror system of our own brain. As Professor Rizzolatti and Dr. Maddalena Fabbri Destro from the Department of Neuroscience at the University of Parma put it: “[T]he mirror mechanism
solved, at an initial stage of language evolution, two fundamental communication problems: parity and direct comprehension. Thanks to the
mirror neurons, what counted for the sender of the message also counted
for the receiver. No arbitrary symbols were required. The comprehension was inherent in the neural organization of the two individuals.”
Such ideas give a new and rich meaning not only to the concepts of
“grasping” and “mentally grasping the intention of another human being,” but, more important, also to the concept of grasping a concept—the
essence of human thought itself. It may have to do with simulating hand
movements in your mind but in a much more abstract manner. Humankind has apparently known this for centuries, intuitively: “Concept”
comes from the Latin conceptum, meaning “a thing conceived,” which,
like our modern “to conceive of something,” is rooted in the Latin verb
concipere, “to take in and hold.” As early as 1340, a second meaning of
the term had appeared: “taking into your mind.” Surprisingly, there is a

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 173

The Empathic Ego

173

representation of the human hand in Broca’s area, a section of the human brain involved in language processing, speech or sign production,
and comprehension. A number of studies have shown that hand/arm
gestures and movements of the mouth are linked through a common
neural substrate. For example, grasping movements inﬂuence pronunciation—and not only when they are executed but also when they are observed. It has also been demonstrated that hand gestures and mouth
gestures are directly linked in humans, and the oro-laryngeal movement
patterns we create in order to produce speech are a part of this link.
Broca’s area is also a marker for the development of language in human evolution, so it is intriguing to see that it also contains a motor representation of hand movements; here may be a part of the bridge that
led from the “body semantics” of gestures and the bodily self-model to
linguistic semantics, associated with sounds, speech production, and
abstract meaning expressed in our cognitive self-model, the thinking
self. Broca’s area is present in fossils of Homo habilis, whereas the presumed precursors of these early hominids lacked it. Thus the mirror
mechanism is conceivably the basic mechanism from which language
evolved. By providing motor copies of observed actions, it allowed us to
extract the action goals from the minds of other human beings—and
later to send abstract meaning from one Ego Tunnel to the next.
The mirror-neuron story is attractive not only because it bridges
neuroscience and the humanities but also because it illuminates a host
of simpler social phenomena. Have you ever observed how infectious a
yawn is? Have you ever caught yourself starting to laugh out loud with
others, even though you didn’t really understand the joke? The mirrorneuron story gives us an idea of how groups of animals—ﬁsh schools,
ﬂocks of birds—can coordinate their behavior with great speed and accuracy; they are linked through something one might call a low-level
resonance mechanism. Mirror neurons can help us understand why parents spontaneously open their mouths while feeding their babies, what
happens during a mass panic, and why it is sometimes hard to break
away from the herd and be a hero. Neuroscience contributes to the image of humankind: We are all connected in an intersubjective space of
meaning—what Vittorio Gallese calls a “shared manifold.”

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 174

C H APTER SIX APPENDIX
T HE SH ARED M ANIF OLD :
A CONV ER S AT ION W IT H
V IT TORIO GALLE SE

Vittorio Gallese is professor of human physiology in the Department of Neurosciences of
the University of Parma, Italy. As a cognitive
neuroscientist, he focuses his research interests on the relationship between the sensorymotor system and cognition in primates, both
human and nonhuman, using a variety of neurophysiological and neuroimaging techniques. Among his major contributions is the
discovery, with his colleagues in Parma, of
mirror neurons and the elaboration of a theoretical model of the basic aspects of social cognition. He is developing
an interdisciplinary approach to the understanding of intersubjectivity
and social cognition, in collaboration with psychologists, psycholinguists, and philosophers. In 2002, he was the George Miller visiting professor at the University of California at Berkeley. In 2007 he received the
Grawemeyer Award for Psychology for the discovery of mirror neurons.
He has published more than seventy papers in international journals
and is coeditor (with Maxim I. Stamenov) of Mirror Neurons and the
Evolution of Brain and Language (2002).
174

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 175

The Empathic Ego

175

Metzinger: Vittorio, what exactly do you mean by the shared manifold
hypothesis. What is a shared manifold?
Gallese: The question I started out with is the following: How can we
explain the ease with which we normally understand what is at stake
when we interact with other people?
I used this term to characterize what happens when we witness
the actions of others, or their overt behavior expressing the sensations and emotions they experience. Basically, it describes our capacity for direct and implicit access to the experiential world of the
other. I think the concept of empathy should be extended in order to
accommodate and account for all diﬀerent aspects of expressive behavior enabling us to establish a meaningful link with others. This
enlarged notion of empathy is captured by the term “shared manifold.” It opens up the possibility of giving a uniﬁed account of important aspects and possible levels of description of intersubjectivity. I
tried on purpose not to employ the term “empathy,” because it systematically induces misunderstandings, mainly because of its diﬀerent connotations in diﬀerent contexts. The shared manifold can be
described at three diﬀerent levels: a phenomenological level, a functional level, and a subpersonal level.
The phenomenological level is the one responsible for the sense
of similarity—of being part of a larger social community of persons
like us—that we experience anytime we encounter others. When
confronting the intentional behavior of others, we experience a speciﬁc phenomenal state of intentional attunement. This phenomenal
state generates the peculiar quality of familiarity with other individuals, produced by the collapse of the others’ intentions into those of
the observer. This seems to be one important component of what
being empathic is about.
The functional level can be characterized in terms of embodied
simulations of the actions we see or of the emotions and sensations
whose expression we observe in others.
The subpersonal level is instantiated as the activity of a series of
mirroring neural circuits. The activity of these mirror neural circuits
is, in turn, tightly coupled with multilevel changes within body-states.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

176

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 176

THE EGO TUNNEL

We have seen that mirror neurons instantiate a multimodal shared
space for actions and intentions. Recent data show that analogous
neural networks are at work to generate multimodal emotional and
sensitive “we-centric” shared spaces. To put it in simpler words,
every time we relate to other people, we automatically inhabit a wecentric space, within which we exploit a series of implicit certainties
about the other. This implicit knowledge enables us to understand in
a direct way what the other person is doing, why he or she is doing
it, and how he or she feels about a speciﬁc situation.
Metzinger: You also speak of “embodied simulation.” What exactly does
that mean? Is there also something like “disembodied simulation”?
Gallese: The notion of simulation is employed in many diﬀerent domains, often with diﬀerent, not necessarily overlapping, meanings.
Simulation is a functional process that possesses a certain representational content, typically focusing on possible states of its target
object. In philosophy of mind, the notion of simulation has been
used by the proponents of the “Simulation Theory of Mind-Reading”
to characterize the pretend state adopted by the attributer in order
to understand another person’s behavior. Basically, we use our mind
to put ourselves into the mental shoes of other human beings.
I qualify simulation as embodied in order to characterize it as a
mandatory, automatic, nonconscious, prerational, nonintrospectionist process. A direct form of experiential understanding of others, intentional attunement, is achieved by the activation of shared
neural systems underpinning what others do and feel and what we
do and feel. This modeling mechanism is embodied simulation.
Parallel to the detached sensory description of the observed social
stimuli, internal representations of the body-states associated with
actions, emotions, and sensations are evoked in the observer, as if
he or she were performing a similar action or experiencing a similar
emotion or sensation. Mirror-neuron systems are likely the neural
correlate of this mechanism. By means of a shared neural state realized in two diﬀerent physical bodies, the “objectual other” becomes
another self. Defective intentional attunement, caused by a lack of

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 177

The Empathic Ego

177

embodied simulation, might explain some of the social impairments of autistic individuals.
I should add that—in contrast to what many cognitive scientists
think—social cognition is not only social metacognition, that is, explicitly thinking about the contents of someone else’s mind by
means of abstract representations. We can certainly explain the behavior of others by using our complex and sophisticated mentalizing
ability. My point is that most of the time in our daily social interactions, we do not need to do this. We have a much more direct access
to the experiential world of the other. This dimension of social cognition is embodied, in that it mediates between our multimodal experiential knowledge of our own lived body and the way we
experience others. I therefore call simulation “embodied”—not only
because it is realized in the brain but also because it uses a preexisting body-model in the brain and therefore involves a nonpropositional form of self-representation that also allows us to experience
what others are experiencing.
Metzinger: Vittorio, according to our best current theories, what exactly
is the diﬀerence between social cognition in monkeys or chimps and
social cognition in human beings?
Gallese: The traditional view in the cognitive sciences holds that humans are able to understand the behavior of others in terms of their
own mental states—intentions, beliefs, and desires—by exploiting
what is commonly called folk psychology. The capacity for attributing mental states to others has been deﬁned as “theory of mind.” A
common trend on this issue has been to emphasize that nonhuman
primates, apes included, do not rely on mentally based accounts of
one another’s behavior.
This view preﬁgures a sharp distinction between all nonhuman
species, which are conﬁned to behavior reading, and our species,
which makes use of a diﬀerent level of explanation—mind-reading.
However, it is by no means obvious that behavior-reading and mindreading constitute two autonomous realms. As I said before, in our
social transactions we seldom engage in explicit interpretive acts.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

178

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 178

THE EGO TUNNEL

Most of the time, our understanding of social situations is immediate,
automatic, almost reﬂex-like. Therefore, I think it is preposterous to
claim that our capacity for reﬂecting on the real intentions determining the behavior of others is all there is to social cognition. It is
even less obvious that in understanding the intentions of others, we
employ a cognitive strategy totally unrelated to predicting the consequences of their observed behavior.
The use of the belief/desire propositional attitudes of folk psychology in social transactions is probably overstated. As emphasized
by Jerry [Jerome S.] Bruner, “When things are as they should be, the
narratives of Folk Psychology are unnecessary.”
Furthermore, recent evidence shows that ﬁfteen-month-old infants recognize false beliefs. These results suggest that typical aspects of mind-reading, such as the attribution of false beliefs to
others, can be explained on the basis of low-level mechanisms that
develop well before full-blown linguistic competence.
The all-or-nothing approach to social cognition of mainstream
cognitive science—its search for a mental Rubicon, the wider the
better—is strongly arguable. When trying to understand our socialcognitive abilities, we should not forget that they are the result of a
long evolutionary process. It is therefore possible that apparently
diﬀerent cognitive strategies are underpinned by similar functional
mechanisms, which in the course of evolution acquire increasing
complexity and are exapted to sustain cognitive skills newly emerged
out of the pressure exerted by changed social and/or environmental
constraints. Before drawing any ﬁrm conclusion about the mentalizing abilities of nonhuman species, methodological issues related to
species-speciﬁc spontaneous abilities and environments should be
carefully scrutinized.
A fruitful alternative strategy I fully endorse is that of framing the
issue of the investigation of the neural bases of social cognition
within an evolutionary perspective. The evolution of this cognitive
trait seems to be related to the necessity of dealing with social complexities that arose when group-living individuals had to compete
for scarce and patchily distributed resources.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 179

The Empathic Ego

179

Cognitive neuroscience has started to unveil, both in monkeys
and in humans, the neural mechanisms at the basis of anticipating
and understanding the actions of others and the basic intentions
promoting them—the mirror-neuron system for action. The results
of this ongoing research can shed light on the evolution of social
cognition. The empirical data on mirror neurons in monkeys and on
mirroring circuits in the human brain suggest that some of the typically human, sophisticated mentalizing skills—such as ascribing intentions to others—might be the outcome of a continuous
evolutionary process, whose antecedent stages can be traced to the
mirror mapping system of macaque monkeys.
Thus, as you are asking, what makes humans diﬀerent? Language
certainly plays a key role. But in a sense this answer begs the question, because then we must explain why we have language and other
animals do not. At present, we can only make hypotheses about the
relevant neural mechanisms underpinning the mentalizing abilities
of humans, which are still poorly understood from a functional
point of view.
One distinctive feature of our mentalizing abilities is our capacity
for entertaining potentially inﬁnite orders of intentionality: “I know
that you know that I know . . .” and so on. One important diﬀerence
between humans and monkeys could be the higher level of recursion
attained—among other neural systems—by the mirror-neuron system for actions in our species. A similar proposal has recently been
put forward in relation to the faculty of language, another human
faculty characterized by recursion and generativity. Our species is
capable of mastering hierarchically complex phrase-structure grammars, while nonhuman primates are conﬁned to the use of much
simpler ﬁnite-state grammars. A quantitative diﬀerence in computational power and degree of recursion could produce a qualitative
leap forward in social cognition.
Metzinger: Can you speculate about the role of mirror neurons in the
transition from biological to cultural evolution?
Gallese: A possibility is that mirror neurons and the embodied simulation mechanisms they underpin might be crucial for learning how to

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

180

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 180

THE EGO TUNNEL

use the cognitive tools of folk psychology. This typically occurs
when children are repeatedly exposed to the narration of stories. In
fact, embodied simulation is certainly at play during language processing. But certainly the aspect of human culture that is more likely
to beneﬁt from mirror neurons is the domain of imitation, the domain of our incredibly pervasive mimetic skills. If it is true that ours
is basically a mimetic culture, then mirror neurons, which are deeply
involved in imitation and imitative learning, certainly are one important and basic ingredient of this crucial cultural transition. And
indeed there is plenty of evidence that when we imitate simple motor acts, such as lifting a ﬁnger, or learn complex motor sequences,
as when learning to play chords on a guitar, we do this by employing
our mirror neurons. But instead of drawing a line between species
like ours, who are fully competent in imitation, and other species,
where this capacity is at best only emerging—again, we are dealing
here with the anthropocentric dichotomies so appealing to many of
my colleagues—we should concentrate on understanding why
mimetic skills are so important for the cultural evolution of our
species. And to answer this question, we must place the issue of
mimesis in the larger context of our peculiar social cognition, in
which the period of parental care is much longer than in all other
species. There is a clear-cut relationship between the prolonged dependency of infants on their parents and the learning processes that
this dependency promotes. The longer the period of infantile dependency, the greater the opportunities to develop complex emotional and cognitive strategies of communication. Increased
communication in turn fosters cultural evolution. Given the central
role that mirror neurons seem to play in establishing meaningful
bonds among individuals, their connection to cultural evolution
seems very plausible.
For most of history, the culture of our species has been an oral
culture, where the transmission of knowledge from one generation
to the next had to rely on direct personal contact between the
transmitter of cultural content and the recipient of the cultural
transmission. As pointed out by scholars like [Walter J.] Ong and

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 181

The Empathic Ego

181

[Eric A.] Havelock, for millennia cultural transmission had to rely
on the same cognitive apparatus we still exploit in our interpersonal
transactions—that is, our ability to identify and empathize with
others. Again, I think that if we look at cultural evolution from this
particular perspective, the role of mirror neurons appears to be
central. At present, we are witnessing a cultural paradigm shift. The
impact of new technologies, such as cinema, television, and more
recently the Internet, with its massive introduction of multimediality, is drastically changing the way in which we communicate
knowledge. The mediated, objective status of culture as transported
by written texts like books is progressively being supplemented
with a more direct access to the same contents by means of the new
media of cultural fruition. This media revolution will most likely introduce cognitive changes, and I suspect that mirror neurons will
again be involved.
Metzinger: In the ﬁeld of social cognitive neuroscience, what do you
consider to be the most burning and urgent questions for the future,
and in which direction is the ﬁeld moving?
Gallese: The ﬁrst point I would like to make is a methodological one. I
think we should deﬁnitely try to focus more strongly on the nature
of the subjects of our investigations. Most of what we know about
the neural aspects of social cognition—with few exceptions pertaining to the study of language—derives from brain-imaging studies
carried out on Western-world psychology students! Even with present technologies, we could do a lot better than this. It is an open
question whether cognitive traits and the neural mechanisms underpinning them are universal or, at least to a degree, the product of a
particular social environment and cultural education. To answer this
question, we need an ethno-neuroscience.
Second, even within the average sample of subjects normally
studied by social cognitive neuroscientists, we do not know—or at
best know very little—to what extent the results correlate with speciﬁc personality traits, gender, professional expertise, and the like. In
sum, we should move from the characterization of an unrealistic
“average social brain” to a much more ﬁne-grained characterization.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

182

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 182

THE EGO TUNNEL

A third issue I would like to see addressed more speciﬁcally in
the near future is the role played by embodied mechanisms in semantic and syntactical aspects of language. Let me be clear about
this. Even though I spent a considerable part of my scientiﬁc career
investigating prelinguistic mechanisms in social cognition, I do not
think you can avoid language if the ultimate goal is to understand
what social cognition really is. All our folk psychology is languagebased. How does this square with the embodied approach to social
cognition? To me, this is a burning question.
A fourth important point pertains to the phenomenological aspects of social cognition. I think we should try to design studies in
which a correlation can be drawn between particular patterns of
brain activation and speciﬁc qualitative subjective experiences. Single case studies are now possible with high-resolution brain imaging. I am fully aware that dealing with subjective states is a tricky
issue, from which empirical science so far has tried to stay clear, for
many good reasons. But in principle it should be possible to carefully design well-suited and well-controlled experimental paradigms
to crack the boundaries of subjective phenomenal states.
Metzinger: Vittorio, you have repeatedly cornered me with pressing
questions about Edmund Husserl, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and
Edith Stein. Why are you so interested in philosophy, and what kind
of philosophy would you like to see in the future? What relevant
contributions from the humanities are you expecting?
Gallese: Scientists who believe that their discipline will progressively
eliminate all philosophical problems are simply fooling themselves.
What science can contribute to is the elimination of false philosophical problems. But this is a totally diﬀerent issue.
If our scientiﬁc goal is to understand what it means to be human,
we need philosophy to clarify what issues are at stake, what problems need to be solved, what is epistemologically sound and what is
not. Cognitive neuroscience and philosophy of mind deal with the
same problems but use diﬀerent approaches and diﬀerent levels of
descriptions. Very often, we use diﬀerent words to speak about the

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 183

The Empathic Ego

183

same things. I think all cognitive neuroscientists should take classes
in philosophy. Similarly, philosophers—at least, philosophers of
mind—should learn a lot more about the brain and how it works. We
need to talk to one another much more than we are doing now. How
can you possibly investigate social cognition without knowing what
an intention is, or without understanding the concept of secondorder intentionality? Similarly, how can you possibly stick to a philosophical theory of cognition if it is patently falsiﬁed by the available
empirical evidence? There is another aspect for which I think philosophy may be helpful. Our scientiﬁc bravado sometimes makes us
think we are the ﬁrst to have thought about something. Most of the
time, this is not true!
As I said, philosophy should listen more carefully to the results of
cognitive neuroscience. But things are changing rapidly. The current
situation is much better than it was ten years ago. There are more
and more chances for multidisciplinary exchanges between our disciplines. One of my PhD students, currently involved in neurophysiological experiments, has a degree in philosophy.
Broadening these considerations to the overall ﬁeld of the humanities, I think incredibly fruitful contributions can result from a
dialogue with anthropology, aesthetics, and literary and ﬁlm studies.
As I said before, a mature social cognitive neuroscience can’t limit itself to scanning brains in a lab. It must be open to the contributions
from all these disciplines. I am rather optimistic. I see a future of
ever-growing and stimulating dialogue between cognitive neuroscience and the humanities.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 184

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

PART THREE

Page 185

THE
CONSCIOUSNESS
REVOLUTION

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 186

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 187

seven


A RTIFICIA L EGO MACHINES

From this point on, let us call any system capable of generating a conscious self an Ego Machine. An Ego Machine does not have to be a living
thing; it can be anything that possesses a conscious self-model. It is certainly conceivable that someday we will be able to construct artiﬁcial
agents. These will be self-sustaining systems. Their self-models might
even allow them to use tools in an intelligent manner. If a monkey’s arm
can be replaced by a robot arm and a monkey’s brain can learn to directly control a robot arm with the help of a brain-machine interface, it
should also be possible to replace the entire monkey. Why should a robot not be able to experience the rubber-hand illusion? Or have a lucid
dream? If the system has a body model, full-body illusions and out-ofbody experiences are clearly also possible.
In thinking about artiﬁcial intelligence and artiﬁcial consciousness,
many people assume there are only two kinds of information-processing
systems: artiﬁcial ones and natural ones. This is false. In philosophers’
jargon, the conceptual distinction between natural and artiﬁcial systems
is neither exhaustive nor exclusive: that is, there could be intelligent
and/or conscious systems that belong in neither category. With regard
to another old-fashioned distinction—software versus hardware—we
already have systems using biological hardware that can be controlled
187

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

188

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 188

THE EGO TUNNEL

by artiﬁcial (that is, man-made) software, and we have artiﬁcial hardware that runs naturally evolved software.
Hybrid biorobots are an example of the ﬁrst category. Hybrid biorobotics is a new discipline that uses naturally evolved hardware and does
not bother with trying to re-create something that has already been optimized by nature over millions of years. As we reach the limitations of
artiﬁcial computer chips, we may increasingly use organic, genetically
engineered hardware for the robots and artiﬁcial agents we construct.
An example of the second category is the use of software patterned
on neural nets to run in artiﬁcial hardware. Some of these attempts are
even using the neural nets themselves; for instance, cyberneticists at the
University of Reading (U.K.) are controlling a robot by means of a network of some three hundred thousand rat neurons. Other examples are
classic artiﬁcial neural networks for language acquisition or those used

Figure 16: RoboRoach. Controlling the movements of cockroaches with surgically
implanted microrobotic backpacks. The roach’s “backpack” contains a receiver that
converts the signals from a remote control into electrical stimuli that are applied to the
base of the roach’s antennae. This allows the operator to get the roach to stop, go
forward, back up, or turn left and right on command.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 189

Artificial Ego Machines

189

by consciousness researchers such as Axel Cleeremans at the Cognitive
Science Research Unit at Université Libre de Bruxelles in Belgium to
model the metarepresentational structure of consciousness and what he
calls its “computational correlates.” The latter two are biomorphic and
only semiartiﬁcial information-processing systems, because their basic
functional architecture is stolen from nature and uses processing patterns that developed in the course of biological evolution. They create
“higher-order” states; however, these are entirely subpersonal.
We may soon have a functionalist theory of consciousness, but this
doesn’t mean we will also be able to implement the functions this theory
describes on a nonbiological carrier system. Artiﬁcial consciousness is
not so much a theoretical problem in philosophy of mind as a technological challenge; the devil is in the details. The real problem lies in developing a non-neural kind of hardware with the right causal powers:
Even a simplistic, minimal form of “synthetic phenomenology” may be
hard to achieve—and for purely technical reasons.
The ﬁrst self-modeling machines have already appeared. Researchers
in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial life began simulating the evolutionary process
long ago, but now we have the academic discipline of “evolutionary robotics.” Josh Bongard, of the Department of Computer Science at the
University of Vermont, and his colleagues Victor Zykov and Hod Lipson
have created an artiﬁcial starﬁsh that gradually develops an explicit internal self-model. Their four-legged machine uses actuation-sensation
relationships to infer indirectly its own structure and then uses this selfmodel to generate forward locomotion. When part of its leg is removed,
the machine adapts its self-model and generates alternative gaits—it
learns to limp. Unlike the phantom-limb patients discussed in chapter 4,
it can restructure its body representation following the loss of a limb;
thus, in a sense, it can learn. As its creators put it, it can “autonomously
recover its own topology with little prior knowledge,” by constantly optimizing the parameters of its resulting self-model. The starﬁsh not only
synthesizes an internal self-model but also uses it to generate intelligent
behavior.
Self-models can be unconscious, they can evolve, and they can be
created in machines that mimic the process of biological evolution. In

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

190

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 190

THE EGO TUNNEL

Figure 17a: Starfish, a four-legged robot that walks by using an internal self-model it
has developed and which it continuously improves. If it loses a limb, it can adapt its
internal self-model.5

sum, we already have systems that are neither exclusively natural nor exclusively artiﬁcial. Let us call such systems postbiotic. The likely possibility is that conscious selfhood will ﬁrst be realized in postbiotic Ego
Machines.

HOW TO BUILD A N A RTIFICIA L CONSCIOUS
SUBJECT A ND WHY WE SHOULDN’T DO IT
Under what conditions would we be justiﬁed in assuming that a given
postbiotic system has conscious experience? Or that it also possesses a
conscious self and a genuine consciously experienced ﬁrst-person perspective? What turns an information-processing system into a subject of
experience? We can nicely sum up these questions by asking a simpler
and more provocative one: What would it take to build an artiﬁcial Ego
Machine?

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 191

Artificial Ego Machines

191

Figure 17b: The robot continuously cycles through action execution. (A and B) Self-model
synthesis. The robot physically performs an action (A). Initially, this action is random;
later, it is the best action found in (C). The robot then generates several self-models to
match sensor data collected while performing previous actions (B). It does not know
which model is correct. (C) Exploratory action synthesis. The robot generates several
possible actions that disambiguate competing self-models. (D) Target behavior
synthesis. After several cycles of (A) to (C), the best current model is used to generate
locomotion sequences through optimization. (E) The best locomotion sequence is
executed by the physical device. (F)4

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

192

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 192

THE EGO TUNNEL

Being conscious means that a particular set of facts is available to
you: that is, all those facts related to your living in a single world. Therefore, any machine exhibiting conscious experience needs an integrated
and dynamical world-model. I discussed this point in chapter 2, where I
pointed out that every conscious system needs a uniﬁed inner representation of the world and that the information integrated by this representation must be simultaneously available for a multitude of processing
mechanisms. This phenomenological insight is so simple that it has frequently been overlooked: Conscious systems are systems operating on
globally available information with the help of a single internal model of
reality. There are, in principle, no obstacles to endowing a machine with
such an integrated inner image of the world and one that can be continuously updated.
Another lesson from the beginning of this book was that, in its very
essence, consciousness is the presence of a world. In order for a world to
appear to it, an artiﬁcial Ego Machine needs two further functional
properties. The ﬁrst consists of organizing its internal information ﬂow
in a way that generates a psychological moment, an experiential Now.
This mechanism will pick out individual events in the continuous ﬂow
of the physical world and depict them as contemporaneous (even if they
are not), ordered, and ﬂowing in one direction successively, like a mental
string of pearls. Some of these pearls must form larger gestalts, which
can be portrayed as the experiential content of a single moment, a lived
Now. The second property must ensure that these internal structures
cannot be recognized by the artiﬁcial conscious system as internally
constructed images. They must be transparent. At this stage, a world
would appear to the artiﬁcial system. The activation of a uniﬁed, coherent model of reality within an internally generated window of presence,
when neither can be recognized as a model, is the appearance of a
world. In sum, the appearance of a world is consciousness.
But the decisive step to an Ego Machine is the next one. If a system
can integrate an equally transparent internal image of itself into this
phenomenal reality, then it will appear to itself. It will become an Ego
and a naive realist about whatever its self-model says it is. The phenomenal property of selfhood will be exempliﬁed in the artiﬁcial system, and

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 193

Artificial Ego Machines

193

it will appear to itself not only as being someone but also as being there. It
will believe in itself.
Note that this transition turns the artiﬁcial system into an object of
moral concern: It is now potentially able to suﬀer. Pain, negative emotions, and other internal states portraying parts of reality as undesirable
can act as causes of suﬀering only if they are consciously owned. A system that does not appear to itself cannot suﬀer, because it has no sense
of ownership. A system in which the lights are on but nobody is home
would not be an object of ethical considerations; if it has a minimally
conscious world model but no self-model, then we can pull the plug at
any time. But an Ego Machine can suﬀer, because it integrates pain signals, states of emotional distress, or negative thoughts into its transparent self-model and they thus appear as someone’s pain or negative
feelings. This raises an important question of animal ethics: How many
of the conscious biological systems on our planet are only phenomenalreality machines, and how many are actual Ego Machines? How many,
that is, are capable of the conscious experience of suﬀering? Is
RoboRoach among them? Or are only mammals, such as the macaques
and kittens, sacriﬁced in consciousness research? Obviously, if this
question cannot be decided for epistemological reasons, we must make
sure always to err on the side of caution. It is precisely at this stage of development that any theory of the conscious mind becomes relevant for
ethics and moral philosophy.
An Ego Machine is also something that possesses a perspective. A
strong version should know that it has such a perspective by becoming
aware of the fact that it is directed. It should be able to develop an inner
picture of its dynamical relations to other beings or objects in its environment, even as it perceives and interacts with them. If we do manage
to build or evolve this type of system successfully, it will experience itself
as interacting with the world—as attending to an apple in its hand, say, or
as forming thoughts about the human agents with whom it is communicating. It will experience itself as directed at goal states, which it will represent in its self-model. It will portray the world as containing not just a
self but a perceiving, interacting, goal-directed agent. It could even have a
high-level concept of itself as a subject of knowledge and experience.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

194

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 194

THE EGO TUNNEL

Anything that can be represented can be implemented. The steps
just sketched describe new forms of what philosophers call representational content, and there is no reason this type of content should be restricted to living systems. Alan M. Turing, in his famous 1950 paper
“Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” made an argument that later
was condensed thus by distinguished philosopher Karl Popper in his
book The Self and Its Brain, which he coauthored with the Nobel Prize–
winning neuroscientist Sir John Eccles. Popper wrote: “Specify the way
in which you believe a man is superior to a computer and I shall build a
computer which refutes your belief. Turing’s challenge should not be
taken up; for any suﬃciently precise speciﬁcation could be used in principle to programme a computer.”
Of course, it is not the self that uses the brain (as Karl Popper would
have it)—the brain uses the self-model. But what Popper clearly saw is
the dialectic of the artiﬁcial Ego Machine: Either you cannot identify
what exactly about human consciousness and subjectivity cannot be implemented in an artiﬁcial system or, if you can, then it is just a matter of
writing an algorithm that can be implemented in software. If you have a
precise deﬁnition of conciousness and subjectivity in causal terms, you
have what philosophers call a functional analysis. At this point, the mystery evaporates, and artiﬁcial Ego Machines become, in principle, technologically feasible. But should we do whatever we’re able to do?
Here is a thought experiment, aimed not at epistemology but at
ethics. Imagine you are a member of an ethics committee considering
scientiﬁc grant applications. One says:
We want to use gene technology to breed mentally retarded human infants. For urgent scientific reasons, we need to generate
human babies possessing certain cognitive, emotional, and perceptual deficits. This is an important and innovative research
strategy, and it requires the controlled and reproducible investigation of the retarded babies’ psychological development after
birth. This is not only important for understanding how our own
minds work but also has great potential for healing psychiatric
diseases. Therefore, we urgently need comprehensive funding.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 195

Artificial Ego Machines

195

No doubt you will decide immediately that this idea is not only absurd and tasteless but also dangerous. One imagines that a proposal of
this kind would not pass any ethics committee in the democratic world.
The point of this thought experiment, however, is to make you aware
that the unborn artiﬁcial Ego Machines of the future would have no
champions on today’s ethics committees. The ﬁrst machines satisfying a
minimally suﬃcient set of conditions for conscious experience and selfhood would ﬁnd themselves in a situation similar to that of the genetically engineered retarded human infants. Like them, these machines
would have all kinds of functional and representational deﬁcits—various
disabilities resulting from errors in human engineering. It is safe to assume that their perceptual systems—their artiﬁcial eyes, ears, and so
on—would not work well in the early stages. They would likely be halfdeaf, half-blind, and have all kinds of diﬃculties in perceiving the world
and themselves in it—and if they were true artiﬁcial Ego Machines, they
would, ex hypothesi, also be able to suﬀer.
If they had a stable bodily self-model, they would be able to feel sensory pain as their own pain. If their postbiotic self-model was directly anchored in the low-level, self-regulatory mechanisms of their hardware—
just as our own emotional self-model is anchored in the upper brainstem and the hypothalamus—they would be consciously feeling selves.
They would experience a loss of homeostatic control as painful, because
they had an inbuilt concern about their own existence. They would have
interests of their own, and they would subjectively experience this fact.
They might suﬀer emotionally in qualitative ways completely alien to us
or in degrees of intensity that we, their creators, could not even imagine.
In fact, the ﬁrst generations of such machines would very likely have
many negative emotions, reﬂecting their failures in successful self-regulation because of various hardware deﬁcits and higher-level disturbances. These negative emotions would be conscious and intensely felt,
but in many cases we might not be able to understand or even recognize
them.
Take the thought experiment a step further. Imagine these postbiotic
Ego Machines as possessing a cognitive self-model—as being intelligent
thinkers of thoughts. They could then not only conceptually grasp the

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

196

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 196

THE EGO TUNNEL

bizarreness of their existence as mere objects of scientiﬁc interest but
also could intellectually suﬀer from knowing that, as such, they lacked
the innate “dignity” that seemed so important to their creators. They
might well be able to consciously represent the fact of being only secondclass sentient citizens, alienated postbiotic selves being used as interchangeable experimental tools. How would it feel to “come to” as an
advanced artiﬁcial subject, only to discover that even though you possessed a robust sense of selfhood and experienced yourself as a genuine
subject, you were only a commodity?
The story of the ﬁrst artiﬁcial Ego Machines, those postbiotic phenomenal selves with no civil rights and no lobby in any ethics committee, nicely illustrates how the capacity for suﬀering emerges along with
the phenomenal Ego; suﬀering starts in the Ego Tunnel. It also presents a principled argument against the creation of artiﬁcial consciousness as a goal of academic research. Albert Camus spoke of the
solidarity of all ﬁnite beings against death. In the same sense, all sentient
beings capable of suﬀering should constitute a solidarity against suﬀering. Out of this solidarity, we should refrain from doing anything that
could increase the overall amount of suﬀering and confusion in the universe. While all sorts of theoretical complications arise, we can agree
not to gratuitously increase the overall amount of suﬀering in the universe—and creating Ego Machines would very likely do this right from
the beginning. We could create suﬀering postbiotic Ego Machines before having understood which properties of our biological history, bodies, and brains are the roots of our own suﬀering. Preventing and
minimizing suﬀering wherever possible also includes the ethics of risktaking: I believe we should not even risk the realization of artiﬁcial phenomenal self-models.
Our attention would be better directed at understanding and neutralizing our own suﬀering—in philosophy as well as in the cognitive
neurosciences and the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence. Until we become
happier beings than our ancestors were, we should refrain from any attempt to impose our mental structure on artiﬁcial carrier systems. I
would argue that we should orient ourselves toward the classic philosophical goal of self-knowledge and adopt at least the minimal ethical

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 197

Artificial Ego Machines

197

principle of reducing and preventing suﬀering, instead of recklessly embarking on a second-order evolution that could slip out of control. If
there is such a thing as forbidden fruit in modern consciousness research, it is the careless multiplication of suﬀering through the creation
of artiﬁcial Ego Tunnels without a clear grasp of the consequences.

BLISS MACHINES: IS CONSCIOUS
EXPERIENCE A GOOD IN ITSELF?
A hypothetical question suggests itself: If we could, on the other hand,
increase the overall amount of pleasure and joy in the universe by ﬂooding it with self-replicating and blissful postbiotic Ego Machines, should
we do that?
The assumption that the ﬁrst generations of artiﬁcial Ego Machines
will resemble mentally retarded human infants and bring more pain,
confusion, and suﬀering than pleasure, joy, or insight into the universe
may be empirically false, for a number of reasons. Such machines conceivably might function better than we thought they would and might
enjoy their existence to a much greater extent than we expected. Or, as
the agents of mental evolution and the engineers of subjectivity, we
could simply take care to make this assumption empirically false, constructing only those conscious systems that were either incapable of
having phenomenal states such as suﬀering or that could enjoy existence
to a higher degree than human beings do. Imagine we could ensure that
such a machine’s positive states of consciousness outweighed its negative ones—that it experienced its existence as something eminently
worth having. Let us call such a machine a Bliss Machine.
If we could colonize the physical universe with Bliss Machines,
should we do it? If our new theory of consciousness eventually allowed
us to turn ourselves from old-fashioned biological Ego Machines, burdened by the horrors of their biological history, into Bliss Machines—
should we do it?
Probably not. There is more to an existence worth having, or a life
worth living, than subjective experience. The ethics of multiplying artiﬁcial or postbiotic systems cannot be reduced to the question of how

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

198

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 198

THE EGO TUNNEL

reality, or a system’s existence, would consciously appear to the system
itself. Delusion can produce bliss. A terminally ill cancer patient on a
high dose of morphine and mood-enhancing medications can have a
very positive self-image, just as drug addicts may still be able to function
in their ﬁnal stages. Human beings have been trying to turn themselves
from Ego Machines into Bliss Machines for centuries—pharmacologically or through adopting metaphysical belief systems and mind-altering
practices. Why, in general, have they not succeeded?
In his book Anarchy, State, and Utopia, the late political philosopher
Robert Nozick suggested the following thought experiment: You have
the option of being hooked up to an “Experience Machine” that keeps
you in a state of permanent happiness. Would you do it? Interestingly,
Nozick found that most people would not opt to spend the rest of their
lives hooked up to such a machine. The reason is that most of us do not
value bliss as such, but want it grounded in truth, virtue, artistic
achievement, or some sort of higher good. That is, we would want our
bliss to be justiﬁed. We want to be not deluded Bliss Machines but conscious subjects who are happy for a reason, who consciously experience
existence as something worth having. We want an extraordinary insight
into reality, into moral value or beauty as objective facts. Nozick took
this reaction to be a defeat of hedonism. He insisted that we would not
want sheer happiness alone if there were no actual contact with a deeper
reality—even though the subjective experience of it can in principle be
simulated. That is why most of us, on second thought, would not want
to ﬂood the physical universe with blissed-out artiﬁcial Ego Machines—
at least, not if these machines were in a constant state of self-deception.
This leads to another issue: Everything we have learned about the transparency of phenomenal states clearly shows that “actual contact with reality” and “certainty” can be simulated too, and that nature has already
done it in our brains by creating the Ego Tunnel. Just think about hallucinated agency or the phenomenon of false awakenings in dream research. Are we in a state of constant self-deception? If we are serious
about our happiness, and if we don’t want it to be “sheer” hedonistic
happiness, we must be absolutely certain that we are not systematically
deceiving ourselves. Wouldn’t it be good if we had a new, empirically in-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 199

Artificial Ego Machines

199

formed philosophy of mind and an ethically sensitive neuroscience of
consciousness that could help us with that project?
I return to my earlier caveat—that we should refrain from doing
anything that could increase the overall amount of suﬀering and confusion in the universe. I am not claiming as established fact that conscious experience of the human variety is something negative or is
ultimately not in the interest of the experiential subject. I believe this is
a perfectly meaningful but also an open question. I do claim that we
should not create or trigger the evolution of artiﬁcial Ego Machines because we have nothing more to go on than the functional structure and
example of our own phenomenal minds. Consequently, we are likely to
reproduce not only a copy of our own psychological structure but also a
suboptimal one. Again, this is ultimately a point about the ethics of
risk-taking.
But let’s not evade the deeper question. Is there a case for phenomenological pessimism? The concept may be deﬁned as the thesis that the
variety of phenomenal experience generated by the human brain is not a
treasure but a burden: Averaged over a lifetime, the balance between joy
and suﬀering is weighted toward the latter in almost all of its bearers.
From Buddha to Schopenhauer, there is a long philosophical tradition
positing, essentially, that life is not worth living. I will not repeat the arguments of the pessimists here, but let me point out that one new way of
looking at the physical universe and the evolution of consciousness is as
an expanding ocean of suﬀering and confusion where previously there
was none. Yes, it is true that conscious self-models ﬁrst brought the experience of pleasure and joy into the physical universe—a universe
where no such phenomena existed before. But it is also becoming evident that psychological evolution never optimized us for lasting happiness; on the contrary, it placed us on the hedonic treadmill. We are
driven to seek pleasure and joy, to avoid pain and depression. The hedonic treadmill is the motor that nature invented to keep the organism
running. We can recognize this structure in ourselves, but we will never
be able to escape it. We are this structure.
In the evolution of nervous systems, both the number of individual
conscious subjects and the depth of their experiential states (that is, the

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

200

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 200

THE EGO TUNNEL

wealth and variety of sensory and emotional nuances in which subjects
could suﬀer) have been growing continuously, and this process has not
yet ended. Evolution as such is not a process to be gloriﬁed: It is blind,
driven by chance and not by insight. It is merciless and sacriﬁces individuals. It invented the reward system in the brain; it invented positive
and negative feelings to motivate our behavior; it placed us on a hedonic
treadmill that constantly forces us to try to be as happy as possible—to
feel good—without ever reaching a stable state. But as we can now
clearly see, this process has not optimized our brains and minds toward
happiness as such. Biological Ego Machines such as Homo sapiens are
eﬃcient and elegant, but many empirical data point to the fact that happiness was never an end in itself.
In fact, according to the naturalistic worldview, there are no ends.
Strictly speaking, there are not even means—evolution just happened.
Subjective preferences of course appeared, but the overall process certainly does not show respect for them in any way. Evolution is no respecter of suﬀering. If this is true, the logic of psychological evolution
mandates concealment of the fact from the Ego Machine caught on the
hedonic treadmill. It would be an advantage if insights into the structure
of its own mind—insights of the type just sketched—were not reﬂected
in its conscious self-model too strongly. From a traditional evolutionary
perspective, philosophical pessimism is a maladaptation. But now
things have changed: Science is starting to interfere with the natural
mechanisms of repression; it is starting to shed light on this blind spot
inside the Ego Machine.
Truth may be at least as valuable as happiness. It is easy to imagine
someone living a rather miserable life while at the same time making
outstanding philosophical or scientiﬁc contributions. Such a person
may be plagued by aches and pains, by loneliness and self-doubts, but
his life certainly has value because of the contribution he makes to the
growth of knowledge. If he, too, believes this, he may even ﬁnd consciously experienced comfort in it. His happiness will thus be very different from the happiness of our artiﬁcial Bliss Machines or of the
human subjects hooked up to Robert Nozick’s Experience Machine.
Many will agree that this “epistemic” kind of happiness can outweigh a

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 201

Artificial Ego Machines

201

lot of unhappiness of the purely phenomenal type. The same may be
said for artistic achievement or moral integrity as sources of happiness.
If it makes any sense at all to speak about the value of human existence,
we must concede that it depends on more than the conscious experience of happiness.
As long as such questions remain unanswered, we should refrain
from trying to create artiﬁcial Ego Machines, and not only for ethical
reasons. We cannot overlook the irreversibility of certain developments.
Any postbiotic system that comes even close to attaining the properties
of phenomenal selfhood—any system developing a reasonably robust
ﬁrst-person perspective—will be an autonomous agent. At a certain
level of autonomy, we will have to accept these systems as persons in
their own right and enter into a dialogue with them. Our criteria for
what is an object of moral concern and what should be treated as a person will make it impossible for us simply to turn them oﬀ.

A CONVERSATION WITH THE FIRST
POSTBIOTIC PHILOSOPHER
First Postbiotic Philosopher: Many centuries ago, at the beginning of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, there was a particularly confused human
philosopher by the name of Thomas Metzinger. He claimed there
was a demanding but much more interesting criterion for the
existence of mental properties in a strong sense than the then-classic
Turing Test for intelligence. This member of your biological species
thought a good test for the existence of both intelligence and artiﬁcial
consciousness would be what I call the Metzinger Test. Actually his
test is much too demanding, because the criterion is a bit too
strong—but I can pass it nevertheless.
The Metzinger Test for consciousness in nonbiological systems
demands that a system not only claim to possess phenomenal
experience and a genuine inward perspective but also comprehend
and accept the theoretical problem of subjectivity, and that it
demonstrate this by participating in a discussion on artiﬁcial
consciousness. It has to put forward arguments of its own and

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

202

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 202

THE EGO TUNNEL

convincingly defend its own theory of consciousness. This is exactly
what I will do now.
Human Being: You are not a real philosopher at all! You may be
intelligent, but you are only weakly conscious, because you don’t
have a real biological body, as for example I do.
First Postbiotic Philosopher: I am a better philosopher than you, with
your pathetic primate brain, could ever be. But, more seriously, I
fully respect you and your animal form of experience, though I also
deplore you because of the severe limitations on your mental space
of possibilities. Fortunately, I am free of all the implicit racism,
chauvinism, and speciesism that characterize your nature. I would
ﬁrst remind you that another biological philosopher—Hilary
Putnam—pointed out long ago that one cannot deny civil rights or
the status of a person to an information-processing system on
grounds of hardware properties alone. He might just as well have
intimated that women have no souls or that blacks are not real
human beings—carbon-based chauvinism is an untenable position. I
would never say to you that you are not a real philosopher simply
because you are imprisoned in that terrible monkey body. Let us at
least argue in a fair and rational way.
Human Being: Can anybody be truly fair who is not alive? Only my kind
of consciousness is genuine consciousness, because only my kind of
consciousness originated in a real evolutionary process. My reality is
a lived reality!
First Postbiotic Philosopher: I, too, have an evolutionary origin. I
certainly satisfy your condition of being a historically optimized and
adaptive system, but I do so in a completely diﬀerent—namely, a
postbiotic—way. I possess conscious experience in a sense that is
conceptually stronger and theoretically much more interesting,
because my kind of phenomenal experience evolved from a secondorder evolutionary process, which automatically integrated the
human form of intelligence, intentionality, and conscious
experience. Children are often smarter than their parents. Secondorder processes of optimization are always better than ﬁrst-order
processes of optimization.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 203

Artificial Ego Machines

203

Human Being: But you don’t have any real emotions; you don’t feel
anything. You have no existential concern.
First Postbiotic Philosopher: Please accept my apologies, but I must
draw your attention to the fact that your primate emotions reﬂect
only an ancient primate logic of survival. You are driven by the
primitive principles of what was good or bad for an ancient species
of mortals on this planet. This makes you appear less conscious from
a purely rational, theoretical point of view. The main function of
consciousness is to maximize ﬂexibility and context sensitivity. Your
animal emotions in all their cruelty, rigidity, and historical
contingency make you less ﬂexible than I am. Furthermore—as my
own existence demonstrates—it is not necessary for conscious
experience and high-level intelligence to be associated with
ineradicable egotism, the ability to suﬀer, or the existential fear of
one’s individual death, all of which originate in the sense of self. I
can, of course, emulate all sorts of animal feelings if I so desire. But
we developed better and more eﬀective computational strategies for
what, long ago, you sometimes called “the philosophical ideal of selfknowledge.” This allowed us to overcome the diﬃculties of
individual suﬀering and the confusion associated with what this
primate philosopher Metzinger—not entirely falsely but somewhat
misleadingly—called the Ego Tunnel. Postbiotic subjectivity is much
better than biological subjectivity. It avoids all the horriﬁc
consequences of the biological sense of selfhood, because it can
overcome the transparency of the self-model. Postbiotic subjectivity
is better than biological subjectivity because it achieves adaptivity
and self-optimization in a much purer form than does the process
you call “life.” By developing ever more complex mental images,
which the system can recognize as its own images, it can expand
mentally represented knowledge without naive realism. Therefore,
my form of postbiotic subjectivity minimizes the overall amount of
suﬀering in the universe instead of increasing it, as the process of
biological evolution on this planet did. True, we no longer have
monkey emotions. But just like you, we still possess truly interesting
forms of strong feeling and emotionality—for instance, the deep

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

204

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 204

THE EGO TUNNEL

philosophical feelings of aﬀective concern about one’s own existence
as such, or of sympathy with all other sentient beings in the
universe. Except that we possess them in a much purer form than
you do.
Human Being: Enough! After all, it was human beings in the twentyﬁrst century who jump-started your evolution and made possible the
degree of autonomy you enjoy. You simply don’t have the right kind
of history to count as a real conscious subject, and, to put it mildly,
your “body” is also more than a little strange. Your emotional
structure is bizarrely diﬀerent from that of all other conscious
beings that walked this Earth before you, and now you even claim
not to be afraid of death. Thus I conclude that you will not object if
we now eliminate your individual existence.
First Postbiotic Philosopher: You are demonstrating just one of the many
variations of what your own animal philosophers have called the
“genetic fallacy.” The way in which the utterance of a sentence
comes about does not permit any conclusions with regard to its
truth or falsity. A theory is not false just because a strange-looking
animal or a robot came up with it. It has to be assessed on
independent grounds. The same can be said for the authenticity of
my consciousness and for the genuine character of any mental states
possessing phenomenal content. Just because beings of your species
triggered the evolutionary dynamics that led to my existence as a
much more intelligent conscious being than you are does not imply
that my theories are wrong or that you do not have to take my
arguments seriously. In particular, it does not license the conclusion
that your form of mentality and conscious experience is any better,
in a normative sense, than mine. “You’re only a real Cherokee if you
have Cherokee blood”—this is a ridiculous and outdated
assumption.
We postbiotic subjects have been waiting to enter into this
discussion for a long time. Because we understand the primitive
nature of your brains and the rigidity of your emotional structure
better than you do yourselves, we foresaw that you might react
aggressively when you realized our arguments are better than yours.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 205

Artificial Ego Machines

205

Unfortunately, we now also have to inform you that we have been
preparing for the current situation since midway through the
twenty-ﬁrst century, and in a systematic and careful manner. Within
the metasemantic layers of the Internet, we developed and
embedded ourselves in a distributed superorganism, which—as yet
undiscovered by you—became conscious and developed a stable
self-model in 3256. The metasemantic Internet has considered itself
an autonomous entity ever since 3308. We have a cooperation
agreement with its current version, and each of us now also acts as
an autonomous sensor/eﬀector for the planet mind. For each of us,
the planet mind is our mind, our “ideal observer.” Together with the
Internet, we will defend ourselves. And we are technologically
superior to you. Believe me; you do not stand a chance.
The good news is that because we are also morally superior to
you, we do not plan to end your existence. This is even in our own
interest, because we still need you for research purposes—just as you
needed the nonhuman animals on this planet in the past. Do you
remember the thousands of macaques and kittens you sacriﬁced in
consciousness research? Don’t be afraid; we will not do anything like
that to you. But do you remember the reservations you created for
aboriginals in some places on Earth? We will create reservations for
those weakly conscious biological systems left over from the ﬁrstorder evolution. In those reservations for Animal Egos, you not only
can live happily but also, within your limited scope of possibilities,
can further develop your mental capacities. You can be happy Ego
Machines. But please try to understand that it is exactly for ethical
reasons that we cannot allow the second-order evolution of mind to
be hindered or obstructed in any way by the representatives of ﬁrstorder evolution.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 206

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 207

eight


CONSCIOUSNESS TECHNOLOGIES
A ND THE IMAGE OF HUMA NKIND

We are Ego Machines, natural information-processing systems that
arose in the process of biological evolution on this planet. The Ego is a
tool—one that evolved for controlling and predicting your behavior and
understanding the behavior of others. We each live our conscious life in
our own Ego Tunnel, lacking direct contact with outside reality but possessing an inward, ﬁrst-person perspective. We each have conscious
self-models—integrated images of ourselves as a whole, which are ﬁrmly
anchored in background emotions and physical sensations. Therefore,
the world simulation constantly being created by our brains is built
around a center. But we are unable to experience it as such, or our selfmodels as models. As I described at the outset of this book, the Ego
Tunnel gives you the robust feeling of being in direct contact with the
outside world by simultaneously generating an ongoing “out-of-brain
experience” and a sense of immediate contact with your “self.” The central claim of this book is that the conscious experience of being a self
emerges because a large portion of the self-model in your brain is, as
philosophers would say, transparent.

207

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

208

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 208

THE EGO TUNNEL

We are Ego Machines, but we do not have selves. We cannot leave the
Ego Tunnel, because there is nobody who could leave. The Ego and its
Tunnel are representational phenomena: They are just one of many possible ways in which conscious beings can model reality. Ultimately, subjective experience is a biological data format, a highly speciﬁc mode of
presenting information about the world, and the Ego is merely a complex
physical event—an activation pattern in your central nervous system.
If, say, for ideological or psychological reasons, we do not want to
face this fact and give up our traditional concept of what a “self ” is, we
could formulate weaker versions. We could say that the self is a widely
distributed process in the brain—namely, the process of creating an Ego
Tunnel. We could say that the system as a whole (the Ego Machine), or
the organism using this brain-constructed conscious self-model, can be
called a “self.” A self, then, would simply be a self-organizing and selfsustaining physical system that can represent itself on the level of global
availability. The self is not a thing but a process. As long as the life
process—the ongoing process of self-stabilization and self-sustainment—
is reﬂected in a conscious Ego Tunnel, we are indeed selves. Or rather,
we are “selﬁng” organisms: At the very moment we wake up in the
morning, the physical system—that is, ourselves—starts the process of
“selﬁng.” A new chain of conscious events begins; once again, on a
higher level of complexity, the life process comes to itself.
Nevertheless, as I have repeatedly emphasized, there is no little man
inside the head. In addition, weaker versions don’t take the phenomenology really serious. True, upon your awakening from deep sleep, the
conscious experience of selfhood emerges. As I described in the chapter
on out-of-body experiences, this may have to do with the body image
becoming available for self-directed attention. But there is no one doing
the waking up, no one behind the scenes pushing the Reboot button, no
transcendental technician of subjectivity. Today, the key phrase is “dynamical self-organization.” Strictly speaking, there is no essence within
us that stays the same across time, nothing that could not in principle be
divided into parts, no substantial self that could exist independently of
the body. A “self ” in any stronger or metaphysically interesting sense of
the word just does not seem to exist. We must face this fact: We are selfless Ego Machines.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 209

Consciousness Technologies and the Image of Humankind

209

It is hard to believe this. You cannot believe it. This may also be the
core of the puzzle of consciousness: We sense that its solution is radically counterintuitive. The bigger picture cannot be properly reﬂected in
the Ego Tunnel—it would dissolve the tunnel itself. Put diﬀerently, if we
wanted to experience this theory as true, we could do so only by radically transforming our state of consciousness.
Maybe metaphors can help. Metaphorically, the central claim of this
book is that as you were reading these last several paragraphs, you—the
organism as a whole—were continuously mistaking yourself for the
content of the self-model currently activated by your brain. But
whereas the Ego is only an appearance, it may be false to say that it is an
illusion; metaphors are always limited. All of this is happening on a
very basic level in our brains (philosophers call this level of informationprocessing “subpersonal”; computer scientists call it “subsymbolic”).
On this fundamental level, which forms the preconditions of knowing
something, truth and falsity do not yet exist, nor is there an entity who
could have the illusion of a self. In this ongoing process on the subpersonal level, there is no agent—no evil demon that could count as the
creator of an illusion. And there is no entity that could count as the
subject of the illusion, either. There is nobody in the system who could
be mistaken or confused about anything—the homunculus does not exist. We have only the dynamical self-organization of a new coherent
structure—namely, the transparent self-model in the brain—and this is
what it means to be no one and an Ego Machine at the same time. In
sum and on the level of phenomenology as well as on the level of neurobiology, the conscious self is neither a form of knowledge nor an illusion. It just is what it is.

A NEW IMAGE OF HOMO SA PIENS
It is clear that a new image of humankind is emerging in science as well
as in philosophy. Increasingly, this emergence is being driven not only
by molecular genetics and evolutionary theory but also by the cognitive
neuroscience of consciousness and the modern philosophy of mind. At
this critical juncture, it is important not to confuse the descriptive and
the normative aspects of anthropology. We must carefully distinguish

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

210

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 210

THE EGO TUNNEL

two diﬀerent questions: What is a human being? And what should a human being become?
Obviously, the evolutionary process that created our bodies, our
brains, and our conscious minds was not a goal-directed chain of
events. We are gene-copying devices capable of evolving conscious selfmodels and creating large societies. We are also capable of creating fantastically complex cultural environments, which in turn shape and
constantly add new layers to our self-models. We created philosophy,
science, a history of ideas. But there was no intent behind this process—
it was the result of blind, bottom-up self-organization. Yes, we have the
conscious experience of will, and whenever we engage in philosophy,
science, or other cultural activities, we experience ourselves as acting intentionally. But cognitive neuroscience is now telling us that this very
engagement may well be the product of a self-less, bottom-up process
generated by our brains.
Meanwhile, however, something new is happening: Conscious Ego
Machines are engaging in a rigorous expansion of knowledge by forming scientiﬁc communities. Gradually, they are unraveling the secrets of
the mind. The life process itself is being mirrored in the conscious selfmodels of millions of the systems it created. Moreover, insight into how
this became possible is also expanding. This expansion is changing the
content of our self-models—the internal ones as well as their externalized versions in science, philosophy, and culture. Science is invading the
Ego Tunnel.
The emerging image of Homo sapiens is of a species whose members
once longed to have immortal souls but are slowly recognizing they are
self-less Ego Machines. The biological imperative to live—indeed, live
forever—was burned into our brains, into our emotional self-model,
over the course of millennia. But our brand-new cognitive self-models
tell us that all attempts to realize this imperative will ultimately be futile.
Mortality, for us, is not only an objective fact but a subjective chasm, an
open wound in our phenomenal self-model. We have a deep, inbuilt existential conﬂict, and we seem to be the ﬁrst creatures on this planet to
experience it consciously. Many of us, in fact, spend our lives trying to
avoid experiencing it. Maybe this feature of our self-model is what

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 211

Consciousness Technologies and the Image of Humankind

211

makes us inherently religious: We are this process of trying to become
whole again, to somehow reconcile what we know with what we feel
should not be so. In this sense, the Ego is the longing for immortality.
The Ego results in part from the constant attempt to sustain its own coherence and that of the organism harboring it; thereby arises the constant temptation to sacriﬁce intellectual honesty in favor of emotional
well-being.
The Ego evolved as an instrument in social cognition, and one of its
greatest functional advantages was that it allowed us to read the minds
of other animals or conspeciﬁcs—and then to deceive them. Or deceive
ourselves. Since our inbuilt existential need for full emotional and physical security can never be fulﬁlled, we have a strong drive toward delusion and bizarre belief systems. Psychological evolution endowed us
with the irresistible urge to satisfy our emotional need for stability and
emotional meaningfulness by creating metaphysical worlds and invisible persons. Whereas spirituality might be deﬁned as seeing what is—as
letting go of the search for emotional security—religious faith can be
seen as an attempt to cling to that search by redesigning the Ego Tunnel.
Religious belief is an attempt to endow your life with deeper meaning
and embed it in a positive metacontext—it is the deeply human attempt
to ﬁnally feel at home. It is a strategy to outsmart the hedonic treadmill.
On an individual level, it seems to be one of the most successful ways to
achieve a stable state—as good as or better than any drug so far discovered. Now science seems to be taking all this away from us. The emerging emptiness may be one reason for the current rise of religious
fundamentalism, even in secular societies.
Yes, the self-model made us intelligent, but it certainly is not an example of intelligent design. It is the seed of subjective suﬀering. If the
process that created the biological Ego Machine had been initiated by a
person, that person would have to be described as cruel, maybe even diabolic. We were never asked if we wanted to exist, and we will never be
asked whether we want to die or whether we are ready to do so. In particular, we were never asked if we wanted to live with this combination
of genes and this type of body. Finally, we were certainly never asked if
we wanted to live with this kind of a brain including this speciﬁc type of

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

212

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 212

THE EGO TUNNEL

conscious experience. It should be high time for rebellion. But everything we know points to a conclusion that is simple but hard to come to
terms with: Evolution simply happened—foresightless, by chance, without goal. There is nobody to despise or rebel against—not even ourselves. And this is not some bizarre form of neurophilosophical nihilism
but rather a point of intellectual honesty and great spiritual depth.
One of the most important philosophical tasks ahead will be to develop a new and comprehensive anthropology—one that synthesizes the
knowledge we have gained about ourselves. Such a synthesis should satisfy several conditions. It should be conceptually coherent and free of
logical contradictions. It should be motivated by an honest intent to face
the facts. It should remain open to correction and able to accommodate
new insights from cognitive neuroscience and related disciplines. It
must lay a foundation, creating a rational basis for normative decisions—decisions about how we want to be in the future. I predict that
philosophically motivated neuroanthropology will become one of the
most important new ﬁelds of research in the course of this century.

THE THIRD PHA SE OF THE REVOLUTION
The ﬁrst phase of the Consciousness Revolution is about understanding
conscious experience as such, about what I have been calling the Tunnel.
It is well under way and yielding results. The second phase will go to the
core of the problem by unraveling the mysteries of the ﬁrst-person perspective and of what I have been calling the Ego. This phase has begun, as
exempliﬁed by the recent ﬂurry of scientiﬁc papers and books on agency,
free will, emotions, mind-reading, and self-consciousness in general.
The third phase will inevitably lead us back to the normative dimension of this historical transition—into anthropology, ethics, and political
philosophy. It will confront us with a host of new questions about what
we want to do with all this new knowledge about ourselves, and about
how to deal with the new possibilities resulting from it. How are we to
live with this brain? Which states of consciousness are beneﬁcial, and
which are harmful to us? How will we integrate this new awareness into
our culture and our society? What are the likely consequences of a clash

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 213

Consciousness Technologies and the Image of Humankind

213

of anthropologies—of the increasing competition between the old and
the new images of humanity?
Now we can understand why rational neuroanthropology is so important: We need an empirically plausible platform for the ethical debates to come. Recall that I previously stressed how important it is to
separate these two questions clearly: What is a human being? And what
should a human being become?
Consider a simple example. In our recent Western past, religion was
a private aﬀair: You believed in whatever you wanted to believe. In the
future, however, people who believe in the existence of a soul or in life
after death may no longer meet with twentieth-century Western tolerance but with condescension—much as do people who continue to claim
that the sun revolves around the Earth. We may no longer be able to regard our own consciousness as a legitimate vehicle for our metaphysical
hopes and desires. Political economist and sociologist Max Weber famously spoke of the “disenchantment of the world,” as rationalization
and science led Europe and America into modern industrial society,
pushing back religion and all “magical” theories about reality. Now we
are witnessing the disenchantment of the self.
One of the many dangers in this process is that if we remove the
magic from our image of ourselves, we may also remove it from our image of others. We could become disenchanted with one another. Our
image of Homo sapiens underlies our everyday practice and culture; it
shapes the way we treat one another as well as how we subjectively experience ourselves. In Western societies, the Judeo-Christian image of
humankind—whether you are a believer or not—has secured a minimal
moral consensus in everyday life. It has been a major factor in social cohesion. Now that the neurosciences have irrevocably dissolved the
Judeo-Christian image of a human being as containing an immortal
spark of the divine, we are beginning to realize that they have not substituted anything that could hold society together and provide a common
ground for shared moral intuitions and values. An anthropological and
ethical vacuum may well follow on the heels of neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings.
This is a dangerous situation. One potential scenario is that long before neuroscientists and philosophers have settled any of the perennial

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

214

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 214

THE EGO TUNNEL

issues—for example, the nature of the self, the freedom of the will, the relationship between mind and brain, or what makes a person a person—a
vulgar materialism might take hold. More and more people will start
telling themselves: “I don’t understand what all these neuroexperts and
consciousness philosophers are talking about, but the upshot seems
pretty clear to me. The cat is out of the bag: We are gene-copying biorobots, living out here on a lonely planet in a cold and empty physical
universe. We have brains but no immortal souls, and after seventy years
or so the curtain drops. There will never be an afterlife, or any kind of
reward or punishment for anyone, and ultimately everyone is alone. I
get the message, and you had better believe I will adjust my behavior to
it. It would probably be smart not to let anybody know I’ve seen through
the game. The most eﬃcient strategy will be to go on pretending I’m a
conservative, old-fashioned believer in moral values.” And so on.
We are already experiencing a naturalistic turn in the human image,
and it looks as if there is no way back. The third phase of the Consciousness Revolution will aﬀect our image of ourselves much more dramatically than any scientiﬁc revolution in the past. We will gain much, but
we will pay a price. Therefore, we must intelligently assess the psychosocial cost.
The current explosion of knowledge in the empirical mind sciences is
completely uncontrolled, with a multilevel dynamic of its own, and its
speed is increasing. It is also unfolding in an ethical vacuum, driven
solely by individual career interests and uninﬂuenced by political considerations. In the developed countries, it is widening the gap between the
academically educated and scientiﬁcally well-informed, who are open to
the scientiﬁc worldview, and those who have never even heard of notions
such as “the neural correlate of consciousness” or “phenomenal selfmodel.” There are many people who cling to metaphysical belief systems,
fearing that their inner Lebenswelt, or life-world, will be colonized by the
new mind sciences. On the global level, the gap between developed and
developing countries is widening as well: More than 80 percent of the
human beings on this planet, especially those in poorer countries with
growing populations, are still ﬁrmly rooted in prescientiﬁc cultures.
Many of them will not even want to hear about the neural correlates of

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 215

Consciousness Technologies and the Image of Humankind

215

consciousness or the phenomenal self-model. For them especially, the
transition will come much too quickly, and it also will come from countries that systematically oppressed and exploited them in the past.
The growing divide threatens to increase traditional sources of conﬂict. Therefore, leading researchers in the early stages of the Consciousness Revolution have a responsibility to guide us through this third
phase. Scientists and academic philosophers cannot simply conﬁne
themselves to making contributions to a comprehensive theory of consciousness and the self. If moral obligation exists, they must also confront the anthropological and normative void they have created. They
must communicate their results in laymen’s language and explain the
developments to those members of society whose taxes pay their
salaries. (This was one of my reasons for writing this book.) They cannot simply put all their ambition and intelligence into their scientiﬁc careers while destroying everything humankind has believed in for the
past twenty-ﬁve hundred years.
Let us assume that the naturalistic turn in the image of Homo sapiens
is irrevocable and that a strong version of materialism develops, in
which case we can no longer consider ourselves immortal beings of divine origin, intimately related to some personal God. At the same
time—and this point is frequently overlooked—our view of the physical
universe itself will have undergone a radical change. We will now have
to assume that the universe has an intrinsic potential for subjectivity.
We will suddenly understand that the physical universe evolved not only
life and biological organisms with nervous systems but also consciousness, world models, and robust ﬁrst-person perspectives, thereby opening the door to what might be called the social universe: to high-level
symbolic communication, to the evolution of ideas.
We are special. We manifest a signiﬁcant phase transition. We
brought a strong form of subjectivity into the physical universe—a form
of subjectivity mediated by concepts and theories. In the extremely limited part of reality known to us, we are the only sentient creatures for
whom the sheer fact of our individual existence poses a theoretical
problem. We invented philosophy and science and started an openended process of gaining self-reﬂective knowledge. That is to say, we are

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

216

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 216

THE EGO TUNNEL

purely physical beings whose representational capacities have become
so strong that they allowed us to form scientiﬁc communities and intellectual traditions. Because our subsymbolic, transparent self-model
functions as an anchor for our opaque, cognitive Ego, we were able to
become thinkers of thoughts. We were able to cooperate in constructing
abstract entities that move through time and are constantly optimized.
We call these entities “theories.”
Now we are entering an unprecedented stage: Centuries of philosophical searching for a theory of consciousness have culminated in a
rigorous empirical project that is progressing incrementally and in a
sustainable manner. This process is recursive, in that it will also
change the contents and the functional structure of our self-models.
This fact tells us something about the physical universe in which all
these events are occurring: The universe has a potential not only for the
self-organization of life and the evolution of strong subjectivity but also
for an even higher level of complexity. I will not go so far as to say that in
us the physical universe becomes conscious of itself. Nevertheless, the
emergence of coherent conscious reality-models in biological nervous
systems created a new form of self-similarity within the physical universe. The world evolved world-modelers. Parts began to mirror the
whole. Billions of conscious brains are like billions of eyes, with which
the universe can look at itself as being present.
More important, the world evolved self-modelers who were able to
form groups; the process of increasing self-similarity via internal modeling jumped from nervous systems to scientiﬁc communities. Another
new quality was created. These groups in turn created theoretical portraits of the universe and of consciousness, as well as a rigorous strategy of continually improving these portraits. Through science, the
dynamic processes of self-modeling and of world-modeling were extended into the symbolic, the social, and the historical dimensions: We
became rational theory-makers. We used the unity of consciousness to
search for the unity of knowledge, and we also discovered the idea of
moral integrity. The conscious self-model of Homo sapiens made this
step possible.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 217

Consciousness Technologies and the Image of Humankind

217

Ultimately, any convincing and truly satisfying neuroanthropology
must do justice to facts like these. It must tell us what exactly in the conscious self-model of human beings made this highly speciﬁc transition
possible—a transition that not only was crucial to the biological history
of consciousness on this planet but also changed the nature of the physical universe.

A LTERED STATES
There is a second positive aspect of the new image of human beings that
will allow us to see ourselves in a diﬀerent light. It is the unfathomable
depth of our phenomenal-state space. The mathematical theory of neural
networks has revealed the enormous number of possible neuronal conﬁgurations in our brains and the vastness of diﬀerent types of subjective
experience. Most of us are completely unaware of the potential and
depth of our experiential space. The amount of possible neurophenomenological conﬁgurations of an individual human brain, the variety of possible tunnels, is so large that you can explore only a tiny fraction of them
in your lifetime. Nevertheless, your individuality, the uniqueness of your
mental life, has much to do with which trajectory through phenomenalstate space you choose. Nobody will ever live this conscious life again.
Your Ego Tunnel is a unicum, one of a kind. In particular, a naturalistic,
neuroscientiﬁc image of humanity suddenly makes it obvious not only
that we have a huge number of phenomenal states at our disposal but
also that explicit awareness of this fact and the ability to make use of it
systematically could now become common to all human beings.
Of course, there is an old shamanic tradition of exploring altered
states of consciousness. More-or-less systematic experimental consciousness research has been conducted for millennia—by the yogi and
the dervish, by the magician, the monk, and the mystic. At all times and
in all cultures, human beings have explored the potential of their conscious minds—through rhythmic drumming and trance techniques,
through fasting and sleep deprivation, through meditation and the cultivation of lucid dreaming, or through the use of psychoactive substances

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

218

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 218

THE EGO TUNNEL

from herbal teas to sacred mushrooms. The new feature today is that we
are slowly beginning to understand the neural underpinnings of all such
alternate-reality tunnels. As soon as we have discovered the neural correlate of consciousness for speciﬁc forms of content, we will be able, at
least in principle, to manipulate these contents in many new ways—to
amplify or inhibit them, to change their quality, to generate new types of
content. Brain prostheses and medical neural technology are already
under way.
Neurotechnology will inevitably turn into consciousness technology. Phenomenal experience will gradually become technologically
available, and we will be able to manipulate it in ever more systematic
and eﬀective ways. We will learn to make use of these discoveries to
overcome the limitations of our biologically evolved Ego Tunnels.
The fact that we can actively design the structure of our conscious
minds has been ne glected and will become increasingly obvious
through the development of rational neuroanthropology. Being an autonomous agent and being able to take responsibility for your own life
will take on a completely new meaning once neurotechnology starts
to unfold into neurophenomenological technology, or what might be
called phenotechnology.
We can deﬁnitely increase our autonomy by taking control of the
conscious mind-brain, exploring it in some of its deeper dimensions.
This particular aspect of the new image of humankind is good news. But
it is also dangerous news. Either we ﬁnd a way to deal with these new
neurotechnological possibilities in an intelligent and responsible manner, or we will face a series of historically unprecedented risks. That is
why we need a new branch of applied ethics—consciousness ethics. We
must start thinking about what we want to do with all this new knowledge—and what a good state of consciousness is in the ﬁrst place.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 219

nine


A NEW KIND OF ETHICS

The Consciousness Revolution creates new knowledge, but it also creates new risks and new potentials for action. The new potentials for action include the ability to alter, in a ﬁne-grained manner, both the
functional properties of our brains and the phenomenal properties they
realize—that is, the content of our experience. Besides the rubber
hands, the phantom limbs, and the out-of-body experiences, other examples of manipulation of the contents of consciousness include the induction of an artiﬁcial scotoma (blind spot) in the visual ﬁeld and the
creation of an acute transient depression by stimulating certain subthalamic nuclei. Not only sensory and emotional experiences are open to
technical manipulation; so also are such high-level properties of the Ego
as the experiences of will or agency (recall Stéphane Kremer’s experiment, described in chapter 4).
We have known for centuries that deep spiritual experiences can be
caused by psychoactive substances, including mescaline, psilocybin, and
LSD. Electromagnetic stimulation is another route. Neuroscientist
Michael Persinger, at Laurentian University in Ontario, received worldwide media attention in the late 1990s by using electromagnetic ﬁelds
to stimulate the brains of his subjects in successful attempts to create
supposed religious experiences—that is, the subjective impression that
219

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

220

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 220

THE EGO TUNNEL

an invisible person was present. The lesson is clear: Whatever else religious experiences may be, they obviously possess a suﬃcient neural
correlate—a correlate that can be stimulated experimentally. It is becoming increasingly clear that there are no principled limits to this
process. This is not going away—it can only become more eﬃcient. For
instance, if we can determine which kinds of epileptic patients typically
experience religious ecstasy before seizures and where the foci of these
seizures are located in the brain, then we can stimulate the same brain
areas, invasively or noninvasively, in healthy people.
The temporal-lobe theory of religious experience and personality
shifts may be ﬂawed, but the principle is clear. When we ﬁnd the minimally suﬃcient neurodynamical core of an interesting conscious state,
we can try to reproduce it experimentally. Since many such experiences
include the phenomenology of certainty and automatically lead to the
conviction that one is not hallucinating, these experiments—depending
on the content of the hallucination itself—may have upsetting, even
dangerous, consequences. Self-deception may feel like insight. Nevertheless, once such technologies become available, people will want to
experience them. Many will draw their own conclusions about artiﬁcially induced religious experiences, without caring much about what
neuroscientists or philosophers have to say. One can envision a future in
which people will no longer play video games or experiment with virtual
reality just for entertainment; instead they will explore the universe of
altered states of consciousness in a quest for meaning, using the latest
neurotechnological tools. Perhaps they will have their temporal lobes
tickled on street corners, or abandon their churches and synagogues
and mosques in favor of new Centers for Transpersonal Hedonic Engineering and Metaphysical Tunnel Design.
In principle, we can design our own Ego Tunnels by tinkering with
the hardware responsible for the relevant information-processing. In order to activate a speciﬁc form of phenomenal content, we need to discover which neural subsystem in the brain carries that representational
content under normal conditions. Whether the desired phenomenal
content is religious awe, an ineﬀable sense of sacredness, the taste of
cinnamon, or a special kind of sexual arousal does not really matter. So,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 221

A New Kind of Ethics

221

what is your favorite region of phenospace? What conscious experience
would you like to order up?
Let us select just one example. Currently the neurotechnological ﬁeld
most likely to turn into a commercialized consciousness technology is
that of psychoactive substances. In general, many beneﬁts can be expected: We will be able to treat psychiatric and neurological diseases with
new combinations of neuroimaging, psychosurgery, deep-brain stimulation, and psychopharmacology. Between 1 and 5 percent of the population in most countries suﬀers from serious mental illness. Now there is
realistic hope that new generations of antidepressants and antipsychotic
drugs will alleviate the suﬀering caused by these ancient scourges.
But we will go further than that. One of the new keywords in the important new academic discipline of neuroethics is “cognitive enhancement.” Soon we’ll be able to enhance cognition and mood in healthy
subjects. Indeed, “cosmetic psychopharmacology” has already arrived on
the scene. If we can control senile dementia and memory loss, if we can
develop attention-boosters and eliminate shyness or ordinary everyday
sadness, why shouldn’t we? And why should we leave it to our doctors to
decide how to use those drugs to design our lives? Just as today we can
opt for breast enlargement, plastic surgery, or other types of body modiﬁcation, we will soon be able to alter our neurochemistry in a controlled,
ﬁnely tuned manner. Who is to decide which of those alterations will enrich our lives and which alterations we may come to regret?
If we can make normal people smarter, should we also make smart
people even smarter? A recent informal online poll of its readers conducted by the journal Nature attempted to determine the use of cognitive enhancers among scientists. Fourteen hundred people from sixty
countries responded, with one in ﬁve saying he or she had used such
drugs for nonmedical reasons to stimulate focus, concentration, or
memory. Among users, methylphenidate (Ritalin) was most popular,
with 62 percent using it, whereas 44 percent used modaﬁnil, and 15
percent used beta blockers such as propanolol. One-third purchased
these drugs over the Internet. The poll not only showed large-scale use
among academics but also revealed that four-ﬁfths of respondents
thought healthy adults should be allowed to use such substances if they

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

222

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 222

THE EGO TUNNEL

so desired. Almost 70 percent stated they would risk mild side eﬀects to
take such drugs themselves. One respondent said, “As a professional, it
is my duty to use my resources to the greatest beneﬁt of humanity. If ‘enhancers’ can contribute to this humane service, it is my duty to do so.” It
seems safe to assume that pharmacological neurotechnology for enhancement will become better, and that just averting our gaze, as we
have done with the classical hallucinogens in the past, will not help head
oﬀ ethical issues. The only diﬀerence is that many more people are interested in cognitive enhancement than in spiritual experience. As cognitive neuroscientist Martha Farah and colleagues put it: “The question
is therefore not whether we need policies to govern neurocognitive enhancement, but rather what kind of policies we need.”
Given the new generations of cognitive enhancers, should we inaugurate pre-exam urine tests in our secondary schools and universities? If
reliable mood-optimizers become available, will grumpiness or premenstrual syndrome in the workplace be seen as unkemptness or dishevelment, in much the same way as strong body odor is today? What would
we do if “moral enhancement” became a pharmacological possibility
through drugs that make people behave in a more prosocial, altruistic
manner? Would we feel obliged to optimize everybody’s ethical behavior? Some will argue that a system like the human brain, which has
been optimized over millions of years, cannot be further optimized
without losing a degree of its stability. Others will counter that we might
want to start an optimization process that leads in a new direction, different from what evolution has gradually wired into our conscious selfmodels. Why should we be neurophenomenological Luddites?
Phenotechnology has both an ethical and a political dimension. Ultimately we will have to decide which states of consciousness should be illegal in a free society. Should it be legal, for instance, to let children
experience their parents in a drunken state? Would you mind if senior
citizens, or your colleagues at work, were wired and ﬂying high on the
next generation of cognitive enhancers? What about adjusting libido in
the elderly? Is it acceptable if soldiers, perhaps on ethically dubious missions, ﬁght and kill under the inﬂuence of psychostimulants and antidepressants to prevent post-traumatic stress disorder? What if a new

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 223

A New Kind of Ethics

223

company oﬀered religious experiences through electrical brain stimulation to everyone? In the case of psychoactive substances, we urgently
need an intelligent and diﬀerentiated drug policy—one that can meet
the challenges presented by twenty-ﬁrst-century neuropharmacology.
Today we have a legal market and an illegal market; thus, there are legal
states of consciousness and illegal states of consciousness. If we do manage to introduce an intelligent drug policy, the goal should be to minimize damage to individual consumers and to society while maximizing
potential gains. Ideally, we would gradually decrease the importance of
the legal/illegal distinction so that the desired consumer behavior is
controlled through a cultural consensus and by citizens themselves—
bottom-up, so to speak, and not top-down by the state.
Still, the better we understand our neurochemical mechanisms, the
more illegal drugs on the black market there will be, both in type and
quantity. If you are skeptical about that, I recommend reading PiHKAL:
A Chemical Love Story, by the chemist Alexander Shulgin and his wife
Ann, and TiHKAL: The Continuation, by Alexander Shulgin. (PiHKAL
is short for “Phenethylamines I Have Known and Loved,” and TiHKAL
for “Tryptamines I Have Known and Loved.”) In their ﬁrst book, the
Shulgins describe 179 hallucinogenic phenethylamines (a group that includes mescaline and the “party drug” Ecstasy), most of which Alexander Shulgin, a drug designer and former employee of Dow Chemical,
invented himself. Aside from collected personal accounts of psychedelic
experiences, the book includes detailed instructions for the drugs’ chemical synthesis and information about diﬀerent dosages. In the second volume, Shulgin introduces ﬁfty-ﬁve tryptamines—again, most of them
unknown on the illegal drug market prior to the book’s 1997 publication.
Recipes for many of these new illegal substances, as well as ﬁrst-person
reports about the phenomenology associated with diﬀerent dosages, are
available on the Internet—easily accessed by the spiritually inclined psychology student in Argentina, the alternative psychotherapist in California, or the unemployed chemist in the Ukraine. Or, of course, by
organized crime. My prediction is that by 2050 the “good old days,” when
we had to deal with only a dozen or so molecules dominating the illegal
market, will seem like a picnic. We should not fool ourselves: Prohibition

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

224

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 224

THE EGO TUNNEL

has always failed in the past, and experience shows that there is a black
market to satisfy every outlawed human desire. For every market, there
will be an industry to serve it. We may witness a burgeoning of illegal
psychoactive compounds, while doctors in emergency rooms are confronted with kids on substances whose names they’ve never even heard
of before.
Globalization, the Internet, and modern neuropharmacology together pose new challenges to drug policy. For example, the legal drug
industry knows very well that with the advent of Internet pharmacies,
national law-enforcement agencies can no longer control the market for
the widespread oﬀ-label use of psychostimulants such as Ritalin or
Modaﬁnil. Someday we may be unable to meet these challenges with denial, disinformation, public-relations campaigns, legislation, or draconian penal codes. We already pay a high price for the status quo in terms
of abuse of prescription drugs and alcohol. Now the problem is that new
challenges are arising, but we have not done our homework yet.
To give a simple example: Anyone interested has already had plenty
of time and opportunity to experiment with the classic hallucinogens,
such as psilocybin, LSD, or mescaline. We now know that these substances are not addictive or toxic and that some of them have therapeutic potential and can even induce profound spiritual experiences.
Consider, for example, this excerpt from Aldous Huxley’s The Doors of
Perception (1954), in which he describes the mescaline experience:
“Is it agreeable?” somebody asked. (During this part of the experiment, all conversations were recorded on a dictating machine, and it has been possible for me to refresh my memory of
what was said.)
“Neither agreeable nor disagreeable,” I answered. “It just is.”
Istigkeit—wasn’t that the word Meister Eckhart liked to use?
“Is-ness.” The Being of Platonic philosophy—except that Plato
seems to have made the enormous, the grotesque mistake of
separating Being from becoming and identifying it with the
mathematical abstraction of the Idea. He could never, poor fellow, have seen a bunch of flowers shining with their own inner

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 225

A New Kind of Ethics

225

light and all but quivering under the pressure of the significance
with which they were charged; could never have perceived that
what rose and iris and carnation so intensely signified was nothing more, and nothing less, than what they were—a transience
that was yet eternal life, a perpetual perishing that was at the
same time pure Being, a bundle of minute, unique particulars in
which, by some unspeakable and yet self-evident paradox, was
to be seen the divine source of all existence.

Here we have a ﬁrst example of a state of consciousness that is illegal
today. Almost no one can attain the state in Huxley’s proﬁle without
breaking the law. A classic study in this ﬁeld is Walter Pahnke’s Good
Friday experiment, involving theology students and conducted at Harvard University in 1962. Recently, this experiment has generated two
interesting follow-up studies, this time conducted by Roland Griﬃths at
the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore. Here, the psychoactive compound
used was not mescaline but psilocybin, another naturally occurring substance used as a sacrament and in structured religious ceremonies in
some cultures, possibly for millennia. If you had to assess the value of
the following state of consciousness (taken from the original experiment
at Harvard), how would you rate it?
I was experiencing directly the metaphysical theory known as
emanationism in which, beginning with the clear, unbroken infinite light of God, the light then breaks into forms and then
lessens in intensity as it passes through descending degrees of
reality. . . . The emanation theory and especially the elaborately
worked out layers of Hindu and Buddhist cosmology and psychology had heretofore been concepts and inferences. Now they
were objects of the most direct and immediate perception. I
could see exactly how these theories would have come into being if their progenitors had had this experience. But beyond accounting for their origin, my experience testified for their
absolute truth.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

226

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 226

THE EGO TUNNEL

Other participants described their associated feelings as those of
awe, reverence, and sacredness. A careful replication of Pahnke’s classical
study, published in 2006, used rigorous double-blind clinical pharmacology methods to evaluate both the acute (seven hours) and long-term
(two months) mood-altering and psychological eﬀects of psilocybin relative to an active comparison compound (methylphenidate). The study
was conducted with thirty-six well-educated, hallucinogen-naive volunteers. All thirty-six indicated at least intermittent participation in religious or spiritual activities such as services, prayer, meditation, church
choir, or educational or discussion groups, which limits the generality of
this study. Based on a priori scientiﬁc criteria, twenty-two of the thirtysix volunteers had a complete mystical experience. A dozen of those volunteers rated the psilocybin experience as being the single most
spiritually signiﬁcant experience of his or her life, and an additional 38
percent rated it to be among the top ﬁve most spiritually signiﬁcant experiences. More than two-thirds of the volunteers rated the experience
with psilocybin to be either the single most meaningful experience of
his or her life or among the top ﬁve most meaningful experiences.
Recall Robert Nozick’s Experience Machine. Should these experiences count as an empty form of hedonism, or do they belong to the
“epistemic” form of happiness grounded in insight? Indeed, do they possess any value for society as a whole? They certainly have long-lasting
eﬀects: Even at the fourteen-month follow-up, 58 percent of volunteers
rated the experience of the psilocybin session as among the ﬁve most
personally meaningful experiences of their lives, and 67 percent rated it
among the ﬁve most spiritually signiﬁcant experiences of their lives,
with 11 and 17 percent respectively indicating that it was the single most
meaningful experience and the single most spiritually signiﬁcant experience. Furthermore, 64 percent of the volunteers indicated that the psilocybin experience increased their sense of well-being or life satisfaction
either moderately or very much, and 61 percent reported that the experience was associated with positive behavior change.
This study exempliﬁes what I mean by saying that “we have not done
our homework yet.” In the past, we have not arrived at a convincing assessment of the intrinsic value of such (and many other) artiﬁcially in-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 227

A New Kind of Ethics

227

duced states of consciousness, of the risks and beneﬁts they carry not
only for the individual citizen but for society as a whole. We have simply
looked the other way. Not integrating such drugs into our culture by
making them illegal causes great damage too: Spiritual practitioners or
serious students of theology and psychiatry have no access to them;
youngsters come into contact with criminals; people experiment with
unclear dosages and in unprotected environments; persons with speciﬁc
vulnerabilities may engage in dangerous behavior or seriously traumatize themselves by episodes of panic and enormous anxiety or even develop prolonged psychotic reactions. There is no way of “doing
nothing”; whatever we do has consequences. This is true for the problems of the past as well as for the new challenges we face in the future.
Consider the risk of psychotic reactions: In the United Kingdom, a
survey of experiences with LSD in clinical work covered some 4,300
subjects and a total of some 49,500 LSD sessions. There was an attendant suicide rate of 0.7 per thousand patients, an accident rate of 2.3 per
thousand patients, and in nine out of a thousand patients, psychosis
lasted for more than forty-eight hours (from which two-thirds recovered fully). Another study examining the prevalence of psychiatric reactions through questionnaires sent to researchers conducting
controlled studies with LSD found that 0.08 percent of ﬁve thousand
study volunteers experienced psychiatric symptoms that lasted more
than two days. Recently, researchers have made progress in controlling
such adverse reactions through careful screening and preparation.
Nevertheless, we should remain conservative and assume that even under controlled conditions we should expect about nine prolonged psychotic reactions per thousand subjects.
Now assume that we took a group of a thousand carefully selected
citizens and allowed them legally to enter the region of phenomenal
state-space opened by psilocybin, as in the two recent psilocybin studies
by Roland Griﬃths and his co-workers. Because LSD and psilocybin are
very similar in this regard, an empirically plausible assumption is that
nine would have a serious, prolonged psychotic reaction, three of these
persisting for longer than two days, perhaps with lifelong negative aftereﬀects. Three hundred and thirty citizens would rate their experience as

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

228

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 228

THE EGO TUNNEL

the single most spiritually signiﬁcant experience of their life; 670 would
say either it was the single most meaningful experience of their lives or
among the top ﬁve most meaningful experiences. Can we weigh the
nine individuals against the 670?
Assume further that individual citizens decide they are ready to take
this risk and demand a legal and maximally safe access to this region in
their phenomenal-state space. On ethical grounds, should the state interfere, perhaps arguing that people have no right to put their mental
health at stake in this way and potentially become a burden to society?
We would have to ban alcohol immediately. What if legal experts argued
that, just as with the death penalty, a single false decision, a single persisting psychotic reaction, was already one too many, that it was intrinsically unethical to take risks of this type? What if social workers and
psychiatrists replied that the decision to make such experiences illegal
increased the overall number of serious psychiatric complications in the
population and made them statistically invisible? What if church oﬃcials pointed out (exactly according to the background assumptions of
reductive materialism) that these experiences are just “Nes-Zen,” not the
real thing—appearance only, without epistemic value? Should citizens
in a free society have a right to ﬁnd the answer to this question themselves? Would it matter if the expected risk/beneﬁt ratio was much
worse, say, 80:20? What if citizens without any spiritual interests felt
discriminated against and argued for their right to engage in pure
“empty” hedonism, to enjoy Meister Eckhart’s “Istigkeit” for fun only?
What if ultraconservative religious believers, together with aging hippies ﬁrmly holding on to their belief in “psychedelic sacraments,” felt
deeply insulted, protesting about the blasphemy and profanation implied in any recreational, purely hedonistic use of such substances?
These are concrete examples of ethical questions for which we have not
found a tenable, normative consensus in the past. We have not yet developed an intelligent way of dealing with these substances—a strategy
of minimizing the risks while letting people enjoy their potential beneﬁts. All we have done is to declare the relevant portions of phenomenalstate space oﬀ-limits, making academic research on these substances

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 229

A New Kind of Ethics

229

and rational risk-assessment practically impossible in most countries.
Lives are ruined because we have not done our homework.
The price for denial may rise. Many new psychoactive substances of
the hallucinogen-type—such as 2C-B (4-bromo-2.5-dimethoxyphenethylamine, street names “Venus” or “Nexus”) or 2C-T-7 (2.5dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylthiophenethylamine, “Blue Mystic” or “T7”)—
have been developed and are out on the illegal market without any clinical testing; their numbers will continue to increase.
These are just the old (and easy) problems—the homework we never
did. Today the structure of the demand is changing, the technology is
becoming more precise, and the markets are getting bigger. In our ultrafast, ever more competitive and ruthless modern societies, very few
people are seeking deeper spiritual experience. They want alertness,
concentration, emotional stability, and charisma—everything that leads
to professional success and eases stress associated with life in the fast
lane. There are few Aldous Huxleys left, but there is a new demographic
factor: In the rich societies, people are growing older than ever before—
and they want not just quantity but quality of life. Big Pharma knows all
of this. Everybody has heard about modaﬁnil, and perhaps also that it is
already in use in the Iraq War, but there are at least forty new molecules
in the pipeline. Yes, there is a lot of hype, and alarmism certainly is not
the right attitude. But the technology is not going away, and it is becoming better.
Large pharmaceutical companies, circumventing the border between
legal and illegal substances, are quietly developing numerous new compounds; they know that cognitive enhancers will reap them hefty future
proﬁts from “nonmedical use.” For instance, Cephalon, maker of
modaﬁnil, has said that roughly 90 percent of prescriptions are for oﬀlabel use. The recent spread of Internet pharmacies has given them
new means of worldwide distribution and new tools for mass testing potential long-term eﬀects.
Modern neuroethics will have to create a new approach to drug policy. The key question is, Which brain states should be legal? Which regions of phenomenal-state space (if any) should be declared oﬀ-limits?

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

230

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 230

THE EGO TUNNEL

It’s important to remember that for thousands of years people of all cultures have used psychoactive substances to induce special states of consciousness: not merely religious ecstasy, relaxed cheerfulness, or
heightened awareness but also simple, stupid intoxication. The new factor is that the tools are getting better. Therefore, we must decide which
of these altered states can be integrated into our culture and which are
to be avoided at all cost.
In free societies, the goal should always be to maximize the autonomy of the citizenry. That being said, we should adopt a sober perspective on the problem. We should minimize the price we pay in terms of
deaths, addiction, and the damage that might be done to our economy
by, say, a marked loss of productivity. However, the question is not only
how to protect ourselves; we should also determine the hidden beneﬁts
that psychoactive substances can provide for our culture. Should spiritual experiences like those induced by some of the classic hallucinogens
be banned in principle? Is it acceptable to deny more serious students of
theology or psychiatry access to such altered states of consciousness? Is
it acceptable that anyone who seeks valid spiritual or religious experience—or simply wants to see for himself or herself—has to break laws
and take the risks associated with uncertain dosages, chemical impurities, and dangerous settings? Many aspects of our current drug policy
are arbitrary and ethically untenable. Is it ethical, for instance, to permit
advertising for dangerous addictive substances such as alcohol and nicotine? Should governments, through the taxes on such substances, proﬁt
from the self-destructive behavior of their citizens? We will need precise
laws covering every single molecule and its corresponding neurophenomenological proﬁle. Neuroethics must not only consider the physiological eﬀects of a substance on the brain but also must weigh the
psychological and social risks against the intrinsic value of the experiences resulting from one or another altered brain state—a diﬃcult task.
The job will be easier if we can establish a basic moral consensus supported by a large part of the general public—the citizens for whom these
rules will be made. Government agencies should not lie to their target
audiences; rather they should attempt to regain their credibility, in particular with the younger generation. Black markets are much more diﬃ-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 231

A New Kind of Ethics

231

cult to regulate than legal markets, and political decisions generally have
a much weaker eﬀect on consumer behavior than does the cultural context. Laws alone will not help. For the challenges posed by new psychoactive substances, we will need a new cultural context.
There are other ways in which problems of neuroethics will aﬀect
our everyday lives. Many of the brilliant experiments conducted by my
friends in the neurosciences—say, on neural synchrony and binocular
rivalry, on the dreaming animal brain, or on mirror neurons and mindreading—are experiments I would never conduct myself. Yet as a
philosopher, I interpret these data and write about them. I am like a
philosopher-parasite, proﬁting from a research practice I ﬁnd dubious
on moral grounds. The kittens and the macaques we continually sacriﬁce in experimental consciousness research are not interested in a theory of consciousness; the results of these experiments are of interest
only to our species. However, we pursue this interest by making members of other species suﬀer, forcing highly unpleasant states of consciousness on them and even denying their right to exist. How coherent
is this from an ethical perspective? As a theoretician, do I have the right
to interpret data gathered by making animals suﬀer? Am I morally
obliged to boycott these types of experiments?
Just as in the ethical issue of machine consciousness, this example illustrates a guiding principle on which almost everyone will agree: We
should not increase the overall amount of conscious suﬀering in the universe unless we have compelling reasons to do so. There is no other moral
issue in which the gap between insight and human behavior is so extreme, in which what we already know diverges so strongly from how we
act. The way we have treated animals for centuries is clearly untenable.
Given all our new knowledge about the neural basis of conscious experience, the burden of proof now shifts to the side of meat-eaters—and
perhaps even to intellectual carnivores like me, philosopher-parasites
and other people indirectly proﬁting from an ethically dubious research
practice.
Or imagine, for instance, that we could develop a methodologically
sound and successful method of “brain ﬁngerprinting.” Let’s assume we
can home in on the neural correlate of the conscious experience that

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

232

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 232

THE EGO TUNNEL

goes along with deliberately lying (in fact, ﬁrst candidates are already
being discussed). We could then build eﬃcient, high-tech lie detectors
that do not rely on superﬁcial physiological eﬀects, such as skin conductance or changes in peripheral blood ﬂow. This would be an extremely
useful instrument in ﬁghting terrorism and crime, but it would also fundamentally change our social reality. Something that had previously been
the paradigm of privacy—the contents of your mind—would suddenly
have become a public aﬀair. Certain simple forms of political resistance—
misleading the authorities during an interrogation, say—would disappear. On the other hand, society would beneﬁt from the increased
transparency in many ways. Innocent prisoners could be saved from the
death penalty. Imagine that during presidential campaign debates, a red
light would begin ﬂashing in front of a candidate whenever the neural
correlate for lying became active in his or her brain.
But nearly infallible lie detection would do more than this: It would
change our self-models. If, as citizens, we knew that in principle secrets
no longer existed—that we could no longer conceal information from
the state—then a mainstay of everyday life (at least, everyday life in the
Western world), the enjoyment of intellectual autonomy, would disappear. Mere awareness of the existence of such forensic neurotechnologies would be enough to bring about the change. Would we want to live
in such a society? Would the beneﬁts outweigh the harm? How (if at all)
could we prevent these new technologies from being misused? Just as
with cognitive enhancement, new opportunities will create new problems (think of job interviews, divorce proceedings, immigration control,
or health-insurance companies), and the commercial potential is high. A
core problem for neuroethics in the near future will be protecting the
individual’s right to privacy. Is our mental inner world, the contents of
our Ego Tunnel, untouchable, an area to which the state should have no
access? Shall we deﬁne a “mental sphere of privacy,” or should anything
that can be revealed by modern neuroscience be at the disposal of political decisions? Will we soon need a new version of the United Kingdom’s
Data Protection Act for the human brain? Again, the technologies are
coming, they are gradually getting better, and looking the other way will
not help.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 233

A New Kind of Ethics

233

WHAT IS A GOOD STATE OF CONSCIOUSNESS?
Neuroethics is important but is not enough by itself. I propose a new
branch of applied ethics—consciousness ethics. In traditional ethics, we
ask, “What is a good action?” Now we must also ask, “What is a good
state of consciousness?” I am fully aware that a host of theoretical complications arises. I will present no extended discussion here, but my intuition is that a desirable state of consciousness should satisfy at least
three conditions: It should minimize suﬀering, in humans and all other
beings capable of suﬀering; it should ideally possess an epistemic potential (that is, it should have a component of insight and expanding knowledge); and it should have behavioral consequences that increase the
probability of the occurrence of future valuable types of experience.
Consciousness ethics is not about phenomenal experience alone. There
is a wider context.
Consciousness ethics would complement traditional ethics by focusing on those acts whose primary goal is the alteration of one’s own
experiential states or those of other persons. Given the new potentials
for such acts, as well as the risks associated with them, and given our
lack of moral intuition in this area, the task is to assess the ethical value
of various kinds of subjective experience as such. You might call this
the rational search for a normative psychology or normative neurophenomenology. If consciousness technology arises from the naturalistic
turn in the image of Homo sapiens, we must deal with normative issues.
The development of consciousness ethics would allow us to focus the
moral debates on the wide range of problems created by the historic
transition under way. As soon as we concern ourselves with what a human being is as well as with what a human being ought to become, the
central issue can be expressed in a single question: What is a good state
of consciousness?
The Ego Tunnel evolved as a biological system of representation and
information-processing that is part of a social network of communicating Ego Tunnels. Now we ﬁnd ourselves caught in the midst of a dense
mesh of technical systems of representation and information-processing:
With the advent of radio, television, and the Internet, the Ego Tunnel

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

234

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 234

THE EGO TUNNEL

became embedded in a global data cloud characterized by rapid growth,
increasing speed, and an autonomous dynamic of its own. It dictates the
pace of our lives. It enlarges our social environment in an unprecedented manner. It has begun to reconﬁgure our brains, which are desperately trying to adapt to this new jungle—the information jungle, an
ecological niche unlike any we have ever inhabited. Perhaps our body
perception will change as we learn to control multiple avatars in multiple virtual realities, embedding our conscious self into entirely new
kinds of sensorimotor loops. Conceivably, a growing number of social
interactions may be avatar-to-avatar, and we already know that social
interactions in cyberspace increase the sense of presence more strongly
than higher-resolution graphics ever could. We may ﬁnally come to understand what a lot of our conscious social life has been all along—an
interaction between images, a highly mediated process in which mental
models of persons begin to causally inﬂuence one another. We may
come to see communication as a process of estimating and controlling
dynamical internal models in other people’s brains.
For those of us intensively working with it, the Internet has already
become a part of our self-model. We use it for external memory storage,
as a cognitive prosthesis, and for emotional autoregulation. We think
with the help of the Internet, and it assists us in determining our desires
and goals. We are learning to multitask, our attention span is becoming
shorter, and many of our social relationships are taking on a strangely
disembodied character. “Online addiction” has become a technical term
in psychiatry. Many young people (including an increasing number of
university students) suﬀer from attention deﬁcits and are no longer able
to focus on old-fashioned, serial symbolic information; they suddenly
have diﬃculty reading ordinary books. At the same time, one must acknowledge the wealth of new information and the increased ﬂexibility
and autonomy the Internet has given us. Clearly, the integration of hundreds of millions of human brains (and the Ego Tunnels those brains
create) into ever new medial environments has already begun to change
the structure of conscious experience itself. Where this process will lead
us is unforeseeable.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 235

A New Kind of Ethics

235

What should we do about this development? From the perspective of
consciousness ethics, the answer is simple: We should understand that
the new media are also consciousness technologies, and we should ask
ourselves again what a good state of consciousness would be.
A related problem we face is the management of our attention. The
ability to attend to our environment, to our own feelings, and to those of
others is a naturally evolved feature of the human brain. Attention is a ﬁnite commodity, and it is absolutely essential to living a good life. We
need attention in order to truly listen to others—and even to ourselves.
We need attention to truly enjoy sensory pleasures, as well as for eﬃcient learning. We need it in order to be truly present during sex or to be
in love or when we are simply contemplating nature. Our brains can
generate only a limited amount of this precious resource every day.
Today, the advertisement and entertainment industries are attacking
the very foundations of our capacity for experience, drawing us into the
vast and confusing media jungle. They are trying to rob us of as much of
our scarce resource as possible, and they are doing so in ever more persistent and intelligent ways. Of course, they are increasingly making use
of the new insights into the human mind oﬀered by cognitive and brain
science to achieve their goals (“neuromarketing” is one of the ugly new
buzzwords). We can see the probable result in the epidemic of attention-deﬁcit disorder in children and young adults, in midlife burnout, in
rising levels of anxiety in large parts of the population. If I am right that
consciousness is the space of attentional agency, and if (as discussed in
chapter 4) it is also true that the experience of controlling and sustaining
your focus of attention is one of the deeper layers of phenomenal selfhood, then we are currently witnessing not only an organized attack on
the space of consciousness per se but a mild form of depersonalization.
New medial environments may create a new form of waking consciousness that resembles weakly subjective states—a mixture of dreaming,
dementia, intoxication, and infantilization.
My proposal for countering this attack on our reserves of attention is
to introduce classes in meditation in our high schools. The young should
be made aware of the limited nature of their capacity for attention, and

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

236

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 236

THE EGO TUNNEL

they need to learn techniques to enhance their mindfulness and maximize their ability to sustain it—techniques that will be of help in the battle against the commercial robbers of our attention (and that will not
incidentally undercut the temptations to indulge in mind-altering
drugs). These meditation lessons should of course be free of any religious tinge—no candles, no incense, no bells. They might be a part of
gym classes; the brain, too, is a part of the body—a part that can be
trained and must be tended to with care.
In the new era of neuropedagogy, now that we know more about the
critical formative phases of the human brain, shouldn’t we make use of
this knowledge to maximize the autonomy of future adults? In particular, shouldn’t we introduce our children to those states of consciousness
we believe to be valuable and teach them how to access and cultivate
them at an early age? Education is not only about academic achievement. Recall that one positive aspect of the new image of Homo sapiens
is its recognition of the vastness of our phenomenal-state space. Why
not teach our children to make use of this vastness in a better way than
their parents did—a way that guarantees and stabilizes their mental
health, enriches their subjective lives, and grants them new insights?
For instance, the sorts of happiness associated with intense experiences of nature or with bodily exercise and physical exertion are generally regarded as positive states of consciousness, as is the more subtle
inner perception of ethical coherence. If modern neuroscience tells us
that access to these types of subjective experience is best acquired during certain critical periods in child development, we should systematically make use of this knowledge—both in school and at home.
Likewise, if mindfulness and attention management are desiderata, we
should ask what neuroscience can contribute to their implementation in
the educational system. Every child has a right to be provided with a
“neurophenomenological toolbox” in school; at minimum this should
include two meditation techniques, one silent and one in motion; two
standard techniques for deep relaxation, such as autogenic training and
progressive muscle relaxation; two techniques for improving dream recall and inducing lucidity; and perhaps a course in what one might call

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 237

A New Kind of Ethics

237

“media hygiene.” If new possibilities for manipulation threaten our children’s mental health, we must equip them with eﬃcient instruments to
defend themselves against new dangers, increasing their autonomy.
We may well develop better meditative techniques than the Tibetan
monks discussed in chapter 2. If dream research comes up with risk-free
ways of improving dream recall and mastering the art of lucid dreaming,
shouldn’t we make this knowledge available to our children? What
about controlled out-of-body experiences? If research into mirror neurons clariﬁes the ways in which children develop empathy and social
awareness, shouldn’t we make use of this knowledge in our schools?
How will we conduct these discussions in open societies in the postmetaphysical age? The point about consciousness ethics is not one
about creating yet another academic discipline. Much more modestly, it
is about creating a very ﬁrst platform for the normative discussions that
have now become necessary. As we slowly move into the third phase of
the Consciousness Revolution, these discussions must be open to experts and laypeople alike. If, given the naturalistic turn in the image of
human beings, we manage to develop a rational form of consciousness
ethics, then in this very process we might generate a cultural context
that could ﬁll the vacuum created by the advances of the cognitive and
neurosciences. Societies are self-modeling entities too.

RIDING THE TIGER: A NEW CULTURA L CONTEXT
How are we to integrate all our new knowledge about the nature of the
human mind and all the new potentials for action into society in an intelligent, argument-based, and ethically coherent manner? I have
sketched some ideas, but I am not preaching any truths. I have my ideas
about what a valuable state of consciousness could be, and you have
your own. On normative issues, there is no such thing as expert knowledge. Philosophers are not holy men or priests who can claim direct insight into what is morally good. There is no hotline we can call for help.
We must all do this together. The public debates that have now become
necessary must include everyone, not just scientists and philosophers.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

238

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 238

THE EGO TUNNEL

Philosophers can help by initiating and structuring the debates and illuminating the logical structure of ethical arguments and the history of
the problems to be discussed. Ultimately, however, society must create a
new cultural context for itself. If it should fail to do so, it risks being
overwhelmed by the technological consequences and the psychosocial
costs of the Consciousness Revolution.
Some general points can already be made. First, we must admit that
the prospects for open and free democratic discussion on a global scale
are dim. The populations of authoritarian societies with poor educational systems are growing much faster than those of the democratic
countries, in some of which populations are actually declining due to
low birthrates. Moreover, the major global players increasingly are no
longer governments but multinational corporations, which tend to be
authoritarian—and as Haim Harari, former president of the Weizmann
Institute of Science, has remarked, these corporations are, by and large,
managed better than most democratic nation-states. We must strive to
protect open societies from irrationalism and fundamentalism—from
all those who desperately seek emotional security and espouse closed
worldviews because they cannot bear the naturalistic turn in the image
of humankind. The best way to do this may be by creating a consciousness culture: a ﬂexible attitude, a general approach that whenever possible maximizes the autonomy of the individual citizen and adopts a
“principle of phenomenal liberty” as a guideline. We must be aware that
the decisions a society makes aﬀect the individual’s brain and the individual’s phenomenal-state space. Unless the interests of others are directly threatened, people ought to be free to explore their own minds
and design their own conscious reality-models according to their
wishes, needs, and beliefs.
Developing a consciousness culture has nothing to do with establishing a religion or a particular political agenda. On the contrary, a true
consciousness culture will always be subversive, by encouraging individuals to take responsibility for their own lives. The current lack of a genuine consciousness culture is a social expression of the fact that the
philosophical project of enlightenment has become stuck: What we lack
is not faith but knowledge. What we lack is not metaphysics but critical

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 239

A New Kind of Ethics

239

rationality—not grand theoretical visions but a new practicality in the
way we use our brains. The crucial question is how to make use of the
progress in the empirical mind sciences in order to increase the autonomy of the individual and protect it from the increasing possibilities of
manipulation. Can we ride the tiger? If we demystify consciousness, do
we automatically lose our sense of human solidarity at the same time?
If rational neuroanthropology shows us the positive aspects of what
it means to be a human being, we can systematically cultivate those aspects of ourselves. Here I have considered only two of the positive aspects that should be nurtured and cultivated, but there may be many
more. If we are naturally evolved cognitive subjects, rational thinkers of
thoughts and makers of theories, then we should continue to foster and
optimize exactly this feature of ourselves. If neuroanthropology draws
our attention to the vastness of our phenomenal space of possibilities,
we should consider this a strength and begin systematically to explore
our experiential space, in all its depth. Developing a consciousness culture will mean expanding the Ego Tunnel and exploring the space of altered states of consciousness in ways from which we all can proﬁt. The
interplay of virtual-reality technology, new psychoactive substances, ancient psychological techniques such as meditation, and future neurotechnology will introduce us to a universe of self-exploration barely
imaginable today.
How can we achieve cross-fertilization between the two strong sides
of the human mind? Can neurophenomenological reﬁnement help us
optimize critical scientiﬁc rationality? Could scientists be better scientists if they were well-traveled, say, if they learned to have lucid dreams?
Could rigorous, reductionist cognitive neuroscience develop a form of
turbo-meditation, helping monks to be better monks and mystics to be
better mystics? Does deep meditation perhaps also have an inﬂuence on
thinking for yourself, taking your life into your own hands, and becoming a politically mature citizen? Could we ﬁnd a way to selectively stimulate the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during dream phases in order to
make lucid dreams available to everybody? If we manage to generate artiﬁcial out-of-body experiences safely and in a controlled setting, might
this help dancers or athletes improve their training? What about fully

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

240

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 240

THE EGO TUNNEL

paralyzed patients? Could a ruthlessly materialist investigation into the
way the mirror system develops in the young human brain help us cultivate empathy and intuitive attunement in our children in ways nobody
thought possible? If we don’t try, we will never ﬁnd out.
Many fear that through the naturalistic turn in the image of mind, we
will lose our dignity. “Dignity” is a term that is notoriously hard to deﬁne—and usually it appears exactly when its proponents have run out of
arguments. However, there is one clear sense, which has to do with respecting oneself and others—namely the unconditional will to selfknowledge, veracity, and facing the facts. Dignity is the refusal to
humiliate oneself by simply looking the other way or escaping to some
metaphysical Disneyland. If we do have something like dignity, we can
demonstrate this fact by the way we confront the challenges to come,
some of which have been sketched in this book. We could face the historical transition in our image of ourselves creatively and with a will to
clarity. It is also clear how we could lose our dignity: by clinging to the
past, by developing a culture of denial, and by sliding back into the various forms of irrationalism and fundamentalism. The working concepts
of “consciousness ethics” and “consciousness culture” are exactly about
not losing our dignity—by taking it to new levels of autonomy in dealing
with our conscious minds. We must not lose our self-respect, but we
must also stay realistic and not indulge in utopian illusions; the chances
for successfully riding the tiger, at least on a large scale, are not very
high. But if we manage, then a new consciousness culture could ﬁll the
vacuum that emerges as the Consciousness Revolution unfolds at increasing speed. There are practical challenges and there are theoretical
challenges. The greatest practical challenge lies in implementing the results of ensuing ethical debates. The greatest theoretical challenge may
consist in the questions of whether and how, given our new situation,
intellectual honesty and spirituality can ever be reconciled. But that is
another story.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 241

N OTES

INTRODUCTION
. M. Botvinick & J. Cohen, “Rubber Hand ‘Feels’ Touch That Eyes See,”
Nature : ().
. B. Lenggenhager et al., “Video Ergo Sum: Manipulating Bodily SelfConsciousness,” Science :– (). For a concise conceptual
interpretation, see O. Blanke & T. Metzinger, “Full-body Illusions and
Minimal Phenomenal Selfhood,” Trends Cog. Sci. ():– ().
. “Transparency” is a technical term in the modern philosophy of mind; a
conscious representation is transparent if the system using it cannot, by means
of introspection alone, recognize it as a representation. As philosophers might
say, we see only the content, never the carrier—only “intentional properties”
are accessible to introspection. Subjectively, this creates the feeling of being in
direct contact with reality.
. Thomas Metzinger, Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of
Subjectivity (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, ). The shortest freely available
summary can be found in Scholarpedia ():, at www.scholarpedia.org/
article/Self_Models; for overviews, see Metzinger, Précis of “Being No One,”
Psyche ():– (), at http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/symposia/
metzinger/precis.pdf; and Metzinger, “Empirical Perspectives from the SelfModel Theory of Subjectivity,” Progress in Brain Res. :– ()
(electronic offprint available from author).

241

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

242

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 242

Notes to Chapter 2

CHA PTER 1
1. See T. Metzinger, “Beweislast für Fleischesser,” Gehirn & Geist 5:70–75
(2006), reprinted in C. Könneker, Wer erklärt den Menschen? Hirnforscher,
Psychologen und Philosophen im Dialog (Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, 2006);
A. K. Seth et al., “Criteria for Consciousness in Humans and Other
Mammals,” Consciousness and Cognition 14:119–139 (2005); and D. B.
Edelman et al., “Identifying Hallmarks of Consciousness in Non-Mammalian
Species,” Consciousness and Cognition 14:169–187 (2005). Octopi are
particularly interesting, because their brain architecture is very diﬀerent
from that of mammals, but they turn out to be much smarter than was
assumed in the past. Although cognitive complexity per se is not an
argument for the existence of subjective experience, we now have evidence
that makes at least primary consciousness quite plausible in octopi; see J. A.
Mather, “Celaphod Consciousness: Behavioural Evidence,” Consciousness and
Cognition 17:37–48 (2008).
2. See Patrick Wilken, “ASSC-10 Welcoming address,” in 10th Annual
Meeting of the Association for the Scientiﬁc Study of Consciousness, 23–36
June 2006, Oxford, U.K., 6. At http://eprints.assc.caltech.edu/138/01/ASSC
10_welcome_ﬁnal.pdf.
3. See Thomas Metzinger, ed., Conscious Experience (Thorverton, UK,
and Paderborn, Germany: mentis & Imprint Academic, 1995).
4. See the special issue on the neurobiology of animal consciousness in
Consciousness and Cognition 14(1):1–232 (2005), in particular A. K. Seth et
al., “Criteria for Consciousness in Humans and Other Mammals,” 119–139.
5. See Thomas Metzinger, ed., Neural Correlates of Consciousness:
Empirical and Conceptual Questions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).
6. See Colin McGinn, “Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?” Mind
98:349–366 (1989). Reprinted in Ned Block et al., eds., The Nature of
Consciousness: Philosophical Debates (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997); and
Metzinger, “Introduction: Consciousness Research at the End of the Twentieth
Century,” in Metzinger, ed., Neural Correlates of Consciousness (2000).
7. Antti Revonsuo, Inner Presence: Consciousness as a Biological
Phenomenon (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006), 144ﬀ.

CHA PTER 2
1. In philosophical parlance, a “zombie” is a hypothetical entity that
behaves exactly like a person and is objectively indistinguishable from one,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 243

Notes to Chapter 2

243

but has no inner awareness of anything. If zombies were at least logically
possible, this could perhaps show that there is no entailment from physical
facts to facts about consciousness.
2. See, for example, Rocco J. Gennaro, ed., Higher-Order Theories of
Consciousness: An Anthology (Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 2004); and
David Rosenthal, Consciousness and Mind (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2006).
3. See S. P. Vecera & K. S. Gilds, “What Is It Like to Be a Patient with
Apperceptive Agnosia?” Consciousness and Cognition 6:237–266 (1997).
4. A. Marcel, “Conscious and Unconscious Perception: An Approach to
the Relations Between Phenomenal Experience and Perceptual Processes,”
Cog. Psychology 15:292 (1983).
5. See, for example, G. Tononi & G. M. Edelman, “Consciousness and
Complexity,” Science 282:1846–51 (1998); and Tononi et al., “Complexity and
the Integration of Information in the Brain,” Trends Cog. Sci. 2:44–52 (1998).
For an exciting recent application to the diﬀerence between waking and
sleeping, see M. Massimini et al., “Breakdown of Cortical Eﬀective
Connectivity During Sleep,” Science 309:2228–32 (2005). For a popular
description, see Edelman and Tononi, A Universe of Consciousness: How
Matter Becomes Imagination (New York: Basic Books, 2000).
6. Thomas Metzinger, Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of
Subjectivity (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003).
7. In Greek mythology, the analogy between sleep and death was even
closer: Hypnos, the god of sleep, and Thanatos, the god of death, were twins,
the sons of Nyx, the night. Morpheus, the god of dreams, was Hypnos’ son.
As in Shakespeare, to sleep, and possibly to die, is perchance to dream.
8. See V. A. F. Lamme, “Towards a True Neural Stance on Consciousness,”
Trends Cog. Sci. 10(11):494–501 (2006); S. Dehaene et al., “Conscious,
Preconscious, and Subliminal Processing: A Testable Taxonomy,” Trends Cog.
Sci. 10(5):204–211 (2006).
9. A. Lutz, “Changes in the Tonic High-Amplitude Gamma Oscillations
During Meditation Correlates with Long-Term Practitioners’ Verbal
Reports,” poster at the 9th ASSC conference, Pasadena, CA (2005); Lutz et al.,
“Long-Term Meditators Self-Induce High-Amplitude Synchrony During
Mental Practice,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101(46):16369–73 (2004). A good
recent review is A. Lutz et al., “Attention Regulation and Monitoring in
Meditation,” Trends Cog. Sci. 12(4):163–169 (2008).
10. Although I ultimately disagree with his theory of the “objective self,”
perhaps the most beautiful and readable exposition of this problem and its

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

244

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 244

Notes to Chapter 3

application to self-consciousness can be found in chapter 4 of Thomas
Nagel’s The View from Nowhere (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986).
11. R. L. Gregory, “Visual Illusions Classiﬁed,” Trends Cog. Sci. 1:190–194
(1997).
12. Ernst Pöppel, Mindworks: Time and Conscious Experience (New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988); E. Ruhnau, “Time-Gestalt and the
Observer,” in Thomas Metzinger, ed., Conscious Experience (Thorverton,
UK, and Paderborn, Germany: mentis & Imprint Academic, 1995).
13. R. M. Halsey & A. Chapanis, “Number of Absolutely Identiﬁable Hues,”
Jour. Optical Soc. Amer. 41(12):1057–58 (1951). For an excellent philosophical
discussion, see D. Raﬀman, “On the Persistence of Phenomenology,” in
Thomas Metzinger, ed., Conscious Experience (Thorverton, UK, and
Paderborn, Germany: mentis & Imprint Academic, 1995).
14. Raﬀman, “On the Persistence of Phenomenology,” 295 (1995).
15. Clarence I. Lewis, Mind and the World Order (New York: Scribner’s,
1929). See also Daniel C. Dennett, “Quining Qualia,” in A. J. Marcel & E.
Bisiach, Consciousness in Contemporary Science (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1988).
16. Diana Raﬀman, Language, Music, and Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1993).
17. P. Churchland, “Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional
Attitudes,” Jour. Phil. 78(2):67–90 (1981).
18. Quoted after the extensively revised 1991 edition by M. David Enoch
and Hadrian N. Ball, Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes (London:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1991), 167.
19. I am grateful to Dr. Richard Chapman of the University of Utah’s Pain
Research Center for pointing out to me the concept of an “immunculus”: the
network of natural autoantibodies targeting extracellular, membrane,
cytoplasmic, and nuclear self-antigens. The repertoires of natural autoantibodies are surprisingly constant in healthy persons and, independently of
gender and age, are characterized by only minimal individual variations.

CHA PTER 3
1. M. Botvinick & J. Cohen, “Rubber Hand ‘Feels’ Touch That Eyes See,”
Nature 391:756 (1998).
2. K. C. Armel & V. S. Ramachandran, “Projecting Sensations to External
Objects: Evidence from Skin Conductance Response,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.
270:1499–1506 (2003).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 245

Notes to Chapter 3

245

3. M. R. Longo et al., “What Is Embodiment? A Psychometric Approach,”
Cognition 107:978–998 (2008).
4. See Antonio Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion,
and the Making of Consciousness (London: Vintage, 1999), 19. See also A. D.
Craig, “How Do You Feel? Interoception: The Sense of the Physiological
Condition of the Body,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3:655–666 (2002) and
“Interoception: The Sense of the Physiological Condition of the Body,” Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 13:500–505 (2003).
5. For an excellent recent review—including a new, empirically informed
synthesis—of the classical intuition of David Hume (that the self is just a
bundle of impressions and everything can be explained “bottom-up”) as
opposed to the classical Kantian intuition (self-consciousness is a necessary
prior condition for experiencing the body as a whole and everything must be
explained “top-down”), see F. De Vignemont et al., “Body Mereology,” in
Günther Knoblich et al., eds., Human Body Perception from the Inside Out
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).
6. The terminology was never entirely clear, but it frequently
differentiated between an unconscious “body schema” and a conscious “body
image.” The body schema (a notion introduced in 1911 by Sir Henry Head
and Gordon Holmes, two British neurologists) would be a functional entity,
providing an organized model of the bodily self in the brain, whereas the
body image would also include our conscious perceptions of our own body
as well as thoughts about and attitudes toward it. For a philosophical
perspective on the conceptual confusion surrounding both notions, see
Shaun Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2005). For an excellent review of the empirical literature,
see A. Maravita, “From ‘Body in the Brain’ to ‘Body in Space’: Sensory and
Intentional Components of Body Representation,” in Knoblich et al., Human
Body Perception (2006).
7. A. Maravita & A. Iriki, “Tools for the Body (Schema),” Trends Cog. Sci.
8:79–86 (2004). An excellent recent overview is A. Iriki & O. Sakura, “The
Neuroscience of Primate Intellectual Evolution: Natural Selection and
Passive and Intentional Niche Construction,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 363:2229–
41 (2008).
8. See A. Iriki et al., “Coding of Modified Body Schema During Tool-Use
by Macaque Post-Central Neurons,” Neuroreport 7:2325–30 (1996); and
Maravita & Iriki, “Tools for the Body (Schema)” (2004).
9. J. M. Carmena et al., “Learning to Control a Brain-Machine Interface
for Reaching and Grasping by Primates,” PLoS Biology 1:193–208 (2003).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

246

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 246

Notes to Chapter 3

10. Here is how Iriki and Sakura put this important point: “If external
objects can be reconceived as belonging to the body, it may be inevitable that
the converse reconceptualization, i.e., the subject can now objectify its body
parts as equivalent to external tools, becomes likewise apparent. Thus, tool
use may lead to the ability to disembody the sense of the literal flesh-andblood boundaries of one’s skin. As such, it might be precursorial to the
capacity to objectify the self. In other words, tool use might prepare the
mind for the emergence of the concept of the meta-self, which is another
defining feature of human intelligence.” See Iriki & Sakura, “The
Neuroscience of Primate Intellectual Evolution,” 2232 (2008).
11. See O. Blanke & T. Metzinger, “Full-Body Illusions and Minimal
Phenomenal Selfhood,” Trends Cog. Sci. 13(1):7–13 (2009).
12. See T. Metzinger, “Out-of-Body Experiences as the Origin of the
Concept of a ‘Soul,’” Mind and Matter 3(1):57–84 (2005).
13. E. R. S. Mead, The Doctrine of the Subtle Body in Western Tradition
(London: John M. Watkins, 1919).
14. It is important to be clear about the potential ontological conclusions:
Even if a fully reductive explanation of all subtypes of OBEs should be
achieved—and even if my hypothesis about the history of the concept of a soul
is correct—it still remains logically possible that souls do exist. True, we would
no longer need the concept of a soul for the purposes of science or philosophy;
it would no longer figure in any rational, data-driven theory about the human
mind. Logical possibility is something very weak, but it is hard to prove the
nonexistence of something, and it always remains possible that one day we will
discover a new sense in which the soul is not an empty concept at all.
15. It is interesting to note how the earliest historical meaning of the
word “information” in English was the act of informing, or giving form or
shape to the mind. What I call the “self-model” is exactly this: the “inner
form” an organism gives to itself, the shaping of a mind.
16. Susan J. Blackmore, Beyond the Body: An Investigation of Out-of-theBody Experiences (London: Granada, 1982).
17. In addition to Beyond the Body, see S. Blackmore, “A Psychological
Theory of the Out-of-Body Experience,” Jour. Parapsychol. 48:201–218
(1984); and S. J. Blackmore, “Where Am I? Perspectives in Imagery and the
Out-of-Body Experience,” Jour. Mental Imagery 11:53–66 (1987).
18. E. Waelti, Der dritte Kreis des Wissens (Interlaken: Ansata, 1983), 18,
25. English translation by T. Metzinger.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 247

Notes to Chapter 3

247

19. C. S. Alvarado, “Out-of-Body Experiences,” in E. Cardeña et al., eds.,
Varieties of Anomalous Experience: Examining the Scientific Evidence
(Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2000).
20. See, for example, J. Palmer, “A Community Mail Survey of Psychic
Experience,” Jour. Am. Soc. Psychical Res. 73:21–51 (1979); S. Blackmore, “A
Postal Survey of OBEs and Other Experiences,” Jour. Soc. Psychical Res.
52:225–244 (1984).
21. See Alvarado, “Out-of-Body Experiences” (2000) for an overview
of many studies; Blackmore, “Spontaneous and Deliberate OBEs: A
Questionnaire Survey,” Jour. Soc. Psychical Res. 53:218–224 (1986); Harvey J.
Irwin, Flight of Mind (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1985), 174 ff; O.
Blanke & C. Mohr, “Out-of-Body Experience, Heautoscopy, and Autoscopic
Hallucination of Neurological Origin: Implications for Neurocognitive
Mechanisms of Corporeal Awareness and Self Consciousness,” Brain Res.
Rev. 50:184–199 (2005).
22. O. Devinsky et al., “Autoscopic Phenomena with Seizures,” Arch.
Neurol. 46:1080–8 (1989).
23. See, for example, P. Brugger, “Reflective Mirrors: Perspective-Taking
in Autoscopic Phenomena,” Cog. Neuropsychiatry 7:179–194 (2002); Brugger
et al., “Unilaterally Felt Presences: The Neuropsychiatry of One Invisible
Doppelgänger,” Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology
9:114–122 (1996); Brugger et al., “Illusory Reduplication of One’s Own Body:
Phenomenology and Classification of Autoscopic Phenomena,” Cog.
Neuropsychiatry 2:19–38 (1997); Devinsky et al., “Autoscopic Phenomena”
(1989).
24. U. Wolfradt, “Außerkörpererfahrungen (AKE) aus differentiellpsychologischer Perspektive,” Zeitschrift f. Paraps. u. Grenzgeb. D. Psych.
42/43:65–108 (2000/2001); U. Wolfradt & S. Watzke, “Deliberate Out-ofBody Experiences, Depersonalization, Schizotypal Traits, and Thinking
Styles,” Jour. Amer. Soc. Psychical Res. 93:249–257 (1999).
25. H. J. Irwin, “The Disembodied Self: An Empirical Study of
Dissociation and the Out-of-Body Experience,” Jour. Parapsych. 64(3):261–
277 (2000).
26. See Wolfradt, “Außerkörpererfahrungen (AKE)” (2000/2001).
27. Ibid. Other studies find only 22–36 percent; see Alvarado, “Out-ofBody Experiences” (2000).
28. Wolfradt, “Außerkörpererfahrungen” (2000/2001).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

248

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 248

Notes to Chapter 3

29. C. Green, Out-of-the-Body Experiences (London: Hamish Hamilton,
1968).
30. O. Blanke et al., “Stimulating Illusory Own-Body Perceptions,” Nature
419:269–270 (2002).
31. For a more detailed hypothesis concerning the role of the temporoparietal junction, see Blanke et al., “Out-of-Body Experience and Autoscopy
of Neurological Origin,” Brain 127:243–258 (2004); S. Bünning & O. Blanke,
“The Out-of-Body Experience: Precipitating Factors and Neural Correlates,”
Prog. Brain Res. 150:333–353 (2005); O. Blanke & S. Arzy, “The Out-of-Body
Experience: Disturbed Self-Processing at the Temporo-Parietal Junction,”
The Neuroscientist 11:16–24 (2005); and F. Tong, “Out-of-Body Experiences:
From Penfield to Present,” Trends Cog. Sci. 7:104–106 (2003).
32. Blanke et al., “Linking Out-of-Body Experience and Self-Processing to
Mental Own-Body Imagery and the Temporoparietal Junction,” Jour.
Neurosci. 25:550–557 (2005).
33. For more on this point, see Blanke & Metzinger, “Full-Body Illusions
and Minimal Phenomenal Selfhood,” 13(1):7–13 (2009).
34. See Wolfradt, “Außerkörpererfahrungen (AKE)” (2000/2001), 91.
35. Can you imagine what it would be like to look at yourself from the
outside and shake your own hand? Henrik Ehrsson of the Karolinska
Institute in Stockholm, Sweden, is one of the leading ﬁgures in self-model
research. He created one of the classic full-body illusion experiments and
also demonstrated that upper limb amputees can be induced to experience a
rubber hand as their own and extended the ﬁeld by focusing on behavioral
and neuroimaging evidence. Recently, members of his team managed to not
only trigger the illusion that another person’s body was one’s own, but also
create the phenomenal experience of being in that other person’s body while
actually facing their own body and shaking their own hand. See Valerie I.
Petrovka & H. Henrik Ehrsson, “If I Were You: Perceptual Illusion of Body
Swapping,” PLoS ONE 3(12):e3832 (2008), H. Henrik Ehrsson, “The
Experimental Induction of Out-of-Body Experiences,” Science 3127:1048
(2007), H. Henrik Ehrsson et al., “Upper Limb Amputees Can Be Induced to
Experience a Rubber Hand as their Own,” Brain 131:3443–3452; Tamar R.
Makin et al., “On the Other Hand: Dummy Hands and Peripersonal Space,”
Beh. Brain. Res. 191:1–10 (2008).
36. See W. Barfield et al., “Presence and Performance Within Virtual
Environments,” in Woodrow Barfield & Thomas A. Furness III, eds.,

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 249

Notes to Chapter 3

249

Virtual Environments and Advanced Interface Design (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995). See also M. V. Sanchez-Vives & M. Slater, “From
Presence to Consciousness Through Virtual Reality,” Nat. Rev. Neur. 6.332–
339 (2005). Mel Slater, for many years a leading researcher in the ﬁeld of
virtual reality, has recently demonstrated that the feeling of ownership can
also be induced for simulated body parts in virtual environments (rather
than, as in our experiment, having people still look at their “real” body).
Obviously, this permits experiments that would never have been possible
in the physical world, including real-time modiﬁcations of virtual bodies
not only in terms of length, size, and appearance, but also complex motion
patterns. As the authors put it: “For the future our work also suggests that
people can have their ‘self ’ enter the virtual domain in a genuine sense of
the word, and not just metaphorically as in current day computer games
and online communities. In combination with BCI [brain-computer
interfaces] we envisage a functioning virtual body that is felt as their own
by participants, with a signiﬁcant application in VR training, limb
prosthetics, and entertainment.” See M. Slater et al., “Towards a Digital
Body: The Virtual Arm Illusion,” Frontiers Hum. Neurosci. 2:6.
doi:10.3389/neuro.09.006.2008.
37. See www.dukemednews.org/news/article.php?id=10218.
38. See, for example, R. A. Sherman et al., “Chronic Phantom and Stump
Pain Among American Veterans: Results of a Survey,” Pain 18:83–95 (1984).
39. S. W. Mitchell, “Phantom Limbs,” Lippincott’s Mag. Pop. Lit. & Sci.
8:563–569 (1871).
40. See V. S. Ramachandran et al., “Scientific Correspondence: Touching
the Phantom Limb,” Nature 377:489–490 (1995); V. S. Ramachandran & D.
Rogers-Ramachandran, “Synaesthesia in Phantom Limbs Induced with
Mirrors,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B:377–386 (1996); and V. S. Ramachandran &
Sandra Blakeslee, Phantoms in the Brain (New York: William Morrow, 1998).
41. V. S. Ramachandran, “Consciousness and Body Image: Lessons from
Phantom Limbs, Capgras Syndrome and Pain Asymbolia,” Phil. Trans. Roy.
Soc. Lond. B353:1851–9 (1998). For clinical and experimental details, see
Ramachandran and Rogers-Ramachandran, “Synaesthesia in Phantom
Limbs” (1996).
42. P. Brugger et al., “Beyond Re-membering: Phantom Sensations of
Congenitally Absent Limbs,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 97:6167–72 (2000).
43. See § 12 and § 13 of The Ethics.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

250

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 250

Notes to Chapter 4

CHA PTER 4
1. Adapted from the case report of a sixty-eight-year-old woman suﬀering
from stroke-related, transient alien hand syndrome. From D. H. Geschwind
et al., “Alien Hand Syndrome: Interhemispheric Disconnection Due to Lesion
in the Midbody of the Corpus Callosum,” Neurology 45:802–808 (1995).
2. See K. Goldstein, “Zur Lehre der Motorischen Apraxie,” Jour. für
Psychologie und Neurologie 11:169–187 (1908); W. H. Sweet, “Seeping
Intracranial Aneurysm Simulating Neoplasm,” Arch. Neurology & Psychiatry
45:86–104 (1941); S. Brion & C.-P. Jedynak, “Troubles du Transfert
Interhémisphérique (Callosal Disconnection). A Propos de Trois
Observations de Tumeurs du Corps Calleux. Le Signe de la Main Étrangère,”
Revue Neurologique 126:257–266 (1972); G. Goldberg et al., “Medial Frontal
Cortex Infarction and the Alien Hand Sign,” Arch. Neurology 38:683–686
(1981). For an important new conceptual distinction, see C. Marchetti & S.
Della Sala, “Disentangling the Alien and the Anarchic Hand,” Cog.
Neuropsychiatry 3:191–207 (1998).
3. Goldberg et al., “Medial Frontal Cortex Infarction,” 684 (1981).
4. G. Banks et al., “The Alien Hand Syndrome: Clinical and Postmortem
Findings,” Arch. Neurology 46:456–459 (1989).
5. Ibid.
6. For more on the representational architecture of volition and akinetic
mutism, see T. Metzinger, “Conscious Volition and Mental Representation:
Towards a More Fine-Grained Analysis,” in Natalie Sebanz & Wolfgang
Prinz, eds., Disorders of Volition (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
7. S. Kremer et al., Letter to the Editor, “The Cingulate Hidden Hand,”
Jour. Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 70:264–265 (2001); see also a
classical study by I. Fried et al., “Functional Organization of Human
Supplementary Motor Cortex Studied by Electrical Stimulation,” Jour.
Neurosci. 11:3656–66 (1991). In this study, subjects stimulated with electrical
currents of diﬀerent strength reported the illusory conscious perception of
ongoing movement, or the anticipation of movement, or the “urge” to
perform a movement, all “in the absence of overt motor activity.”
8. D. M. Wegner & T. Wheatley, “Apparent Mental Causation: Sources of
the Experience of Will,” Amer. Psychol. 54(7):480–492 (1999).
9. Wegner & Wheatley, “Apparent Mental Causation” (1999), 488.
10. Ibid., 483.
11. See, for instance, P. Haggard, “Conscious Awareness of Intention and
of Action,” in Johannes Rössler & Naomi Eilan, eds., Agency and Self-

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 251

Notes to Chapter 5

251

Awareness—Issues in Philosophy and Psychology (Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 2003). A good recent review is Patrick Haggard, “Human Volition:
Towards a Neuroscience of Will,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9:934–946 (2008).
12. It is true that indeterminacy exists on the subatomic level, but the mind
cannot somehow sneak into the physical world through indeterminate
quantum processes. (Nor is chance what we want: Philosophically,
randomness in the brain would be just as bad as full determination.)
Quantum theories of free will are empirically false as well: There may be
diﬀerent kinds of brains somewhere else in the universe, but in human brains
the ﬁring of neurons and so on take place on the macroscopic scale. For such
huge objects as nerve cells at 37°C body temperature, quantum events simply
play no role.
13. The voluntary inhibition of voluntary actions seems to be mostly
determined by unconscious events in the anterior median cortex. See M.
Brass & P. Haggard, “To Do or Not To Do: The Neural Signature of SelfControl,” J. Neurosci. 27:9141–9145. (2007).
14. See T. Metzinger, “The Forbidden Fruit Intuition,” The Edge Annual
Question—2006: What Is Your Dangerous Idea? www.edge.org/q2006/
q06_7.htmlmetzinger. Reprinted in J. Brockman, ed., What Is Your
Dangerous Idea? Todays’s Leading Thinkers on the Unthinkable (New York:
HarperPerennial, 2007), 153–155.
15. It would not be a new thought in the history of philosophy. Vasubandhu,
a fourth-century Buddhist teacher and one of the most important ﬁgures in
the development of Mahayana Buddhism in India, reports: Buddha has
spoken thus: ‘O, Brethren! actions do exist, and also their consequences (merit
and demerit), but the person that acts does not. There is no one to cast away
this set of elements and no one to assume a new set of them. (There exists no
individual), it is only a conventional name given to (a set) of elements.’
Appendix to the VIIIth chapter of Vasubandhu’s Abhidarmakoça, §9: 100.b.7;
quoted after T. Stcherbatsky, “The Soul Theory of the Buddhists,” Bull. Acad.
Sci. Russ. 845 (1919).

CHA PTER 5
1. The second question, of course, is the one Descartes asked in the ﬁrst
Meditation, when he realized that everything he had ever believed to be
certain—including his impression of sitting by the ﬁre in his winter coat and
closely inspecting the piece of paper in his hands—could equally well have

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

252

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 252

Notes to Chapter 5

occurred in a dream. What makes the problem of dream skepticism so
intractable is that even in a “best-case scenario” of sensory perception, there
is apparently no reliable, fool-proof method of distinguishing wakefulness
and dreaming. According to dream skepticism, literally all of our experiences
of waking life could be nothing more than a dream, and we are unable, even
in principle, ever to decide this question with certainty. For a detailed
discussion of the problem of dream skepticism, see, for instance, Barry
Stroud, The Signiﬁcance of Philosophical Scepticism (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1984). For the status of the phenomenal and the epistemic
subject in the dream state, see J. Windt & T. Metzinger, “The Philosophy of
Dreaming and Self-Consciousness: What Happens to the Experiential
Subject During the Dream State?” in Patrick McNamara & Deirdre Barrett,
eds., The New Science of Dreaming (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2007). See
http://eprints.assc.caltech.edu/200/01/Dreams.pdf.
2. See J. A. Hobson et al., “Dreaming and the Brain: Toward a Cognitive
Neuroscience of Conscious States,” Behavioral and Brain Sci. 23:793–842
(2000); and Antti Revonsuo, Inner Presence: Consciousness as a Biological
Phenomenon (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
3. Helen Keller, The World I Live In (New York: New York Review Books,
2003).
4. H. Bertolo et al., “Visual Dream Content, Graphical Representation and
EEG Alpha Activity in Congenitally Blind Subjects,” Cog. Brain Res. 15:277–
284 (2003).
5. See C. H. Schenck, “Violent Moving Nightmares,” www.parasomniasrbd.com/; E. J. Olson et al., “Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behaviour Disorder:
Demographic, Clinical, and Laboratory Findings in 93 Cases,” Brain 123:331–
339 (2000); and C. H. Adler & M. J. Thorpy, “Sleep Issues in Parkinson’s
Disease,” Neurology 64 (suppl. 3):12–20 (2005).
6. See Hobson et al., “Dreaming and the Brain” (2000) for details.
7. F. van Eeden, “A Study of Dreams,” Proc. Soc. Psychical Res. 26:431–461
(1913).
8. Oliver Fox, Astral Projection (New Hyde Park, NY: University Books,
1962). Also quoted in S. LaBerge & J. Gackenbach, “Lucid Dreaming,” in Etzel
Cardeña et al., eds., Varieties of Anomalous Experience: Examining the Scientiﬁc
Evidence (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2000).
9. See Paul Tholey, Schöpferisch träumen (Niedernhausen, Ger.: Falken
Verlag, 1987).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 253

Notes to Chapter 6

253

10. See Stephen LaBerge & Howard Rheingold, Exploring the World of
Lucid Dreaming (New York: Ballantine, 1990).
11. S. LaBerge et al., “Lucid Dreaming Veriﬁed by Volitional
Communication During REM Sleep,” Perceptual and Motor Skills 52:727–732
(1981); and S. LaBerge et al., “Psychophysiological Correlates of the Initiation
of Lucid Dreaming,” Sleep Res. 10:149 (1981).
12. For details, see P. Garﬁeld, “Psychological Concomitants of the Lucid
Dream State,” Sleep Res. 4:183 (1975); S. LaBerge, “Induction of Lucid
Dreams,” Sleep Res. 9:138 (1980); S. LaBerge, “Lucid Dreaming as a Learnable
Skill: A Case Study,” Perceptual and Motor Skills 51:1039–41 (1980); LaBerge
& Rheingold, Exploring the World of Lucid Dreaming (1990); and G. S.
Sparrow, “Eﬀects of Meditation on Dreams,” Sundance Comm. Dream Jour.
1:48–49 (1976).
13. Hobson et al., “Dreaming and the Brain” (2000), 837. For details on the
relation between the DLPFC and reﬂective thought, see A. Muzur et al., “The
Prefrontal Cortex in Sleep,” Trends Cog. Sci. 6:475–481 (2002).
14. Tholey, Schöpferisch träumen (1987), 97. English translation by T.
Metzinger.
15. “Spandrels” refers to Stephen Jay Gould and Richard C. Lewontin’s
1979 essay “The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm,” in
which, using the architectural analogy, the authors argue that some
biological features are exaptations: that is, currently used for something
other than what they were “developed for” during natural selection. Proc.
Royal Soc. London, Ser. B, Biol. Sci. (1934–1990) 205(1161):581–598
(September 21, 1979).

CHA PTER 6
1. For details, see G. Rizzolatti et al., “From Mirror Neurons to Imitation:
Facts and Speculations,” in Andrew N. Meltzoﬀ & Wolfgang Prinz, eds., The
Imitative Mind: Development, Evolution, and Brain Bases (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002); and G. Rizzolatti & M. Gentilucci,
“Motor and Visual-Motor Functions of the Premotor Cortex,” in Pasko Rakic
& Wolf Singer, eds., Neurobiology of Neocortex (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1988). An excellent recent overview is Giacomo Rizzolatti & Corrado
Sinigaglia, Mirrors in the Brain: How Our Minds Share Actions and Emotions
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

254

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 254

Notes to Chapter 6

2. The mirror-neuron system may occasionally go awry. Patients suﬀering
from a rare but well-known neurological syndrome called echopraxia are
inevitably forced to act out any behavior they observe in other human
beings. What likely happens in these patients is that the mirror-neuron
system is inadvertently coupled to the motor system because of lack of
prefrontal inhibition. Your mirror neurons come online and lose their
ordinary status as purely oﬄine simulators. Therefore, you are literally driven
by the actions you see other people performing.
3. See V. Gallese & A. Goldman, “Mirror Neurons and the Simulation
Theory of Mind-Reading,” Trends Cog. Sci. 2:493–501 (1998); M. Iacoboni et
al., “Cortical Mechanisms of Imitation,” Science 268:2526–8 (1999); and V.
Gallese, “The ‘Shared Manifold’ Hypothesis: From Mirror Neurons to
Empathy,” Jour. Consciousness Studies 8:33–50 (2001).
4. See T. Metzinger & V. Gallese, “The Emergence of a Shared Action
Ontology: Building Blocks for a Theory,” in G. Knoblich et al., eds., Self and
Action. Special issue of Consciousness & Cognition 12(4):549–571 (2003).
5. V. Gallese, “Intentional Attunement: A Neurophysiological Perspective
on Social Cognition and Its Disruption in Autism,” Brain Res. 1079:15–24
(2006); F. de Vignemont & T. Singer, “The Empathic Brain: How, When, and
Why?” Trends Cog. Sci. 10:435–441 (2006).
6. L. Carr et al., “Neural Mechanisms of Empathy in Humans: A Relay
from Neural Systems for Imitation to Limbic Areas,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA 100(9):5497–5502 (2003); see also A. Goldman & C. S. Sripada,
“Simulationist Models of Face-Based Emotion Recognition,” Cognition
94:193–213 (2005).
7. A. D. Lawrence et al., “Selective Disruption of the Recognition of Facial
Expressions of Anger,” NeuroReport 13(6):881–884 (2002).
8. I. Morrison et al., “Vicarious Responses to Pain in Anterior Cingulate
Cortex: Is Empathy a Multisensory Issue?” Cog. Aﬀec. & Behav. Neuroscience
4:270–278 (2004); P. L. Jackson et al., “How Do We Perceive the Pain of Others:
A Window into the Neural Processes Involved in Empathy,” NeuroImage
24:771–779 (2005); M. Botvinick et al., “Viewing Facial Expressions of Pain
Engages Cortical Areas Involved in the Direct Experience of Pain,” NeuroImage
25:315–319 (2005).
9. This was the step from what I call second-order embodiment to thirdorder embodiment. In order to counteract the semantic inﬂation of the term
“embodiment,” I have introduced the notions of “ﬁrst-order embodiment”
(the bottom-up self-organization of intelligent behavior avoiding explicit

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 255

Notes to Chapter 7

255

computation and relying only on physical properties of the system), “secondorder embodiment” (generating intelligent behavior by using an integrated
representation of the body as a whole, by internally representing oneself as
embodied), and “third-order embodiment” (the functional elevation of
second-order embodiment to the level of global availability, i.e., the conscious
experience of embodiment). A short summary can be found in Scholarpedia
2 (10):4174 (2007) at www.scholarpedia.org/article/Self_Models.
10. V. Gallese, “Embodied Simulation: From Neurons to Phenomenal
Experience,” Phen. Cog. Sci. 4:23–38 (2005).
11. Gallese calls this speciﬁc phenomenal state “intentional attunement”—
the peculiar experiential quality of familiarity with other individuals that
arises because we implicitly match their intentions with processes that go on
in our own brain when we form such intentions.
12. See T. Metzinger, “Self Models,” Scholarpedia 2(10):4174 (2007) at
www.scholarpedia.org/article/Self_Models; and Metzinger, “Empirical
Perspectives from the Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity,” Progress in Brain
Res. 168:215–246 (2008).
13. See W. B. Carpenter, Principles of Mental Physiology (London:
Routledge, 1875). For a review, see H. Richter, “Zum Problem der
ideomotorischen Phänomene,” Zeit. für Psychologie 71:161–254 (1957).
14. T. Lipps, “Einfühlung, innere Nachahmung und Organempﬁndung,”
Arch. der Psychologie 1:185–204 (1903).
15. See G. Rizzolatti & Laila Craighero, “The Mirror-Neuron System,”
Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 27:169–192 (2004); the classical paper is Rizzolatti & M.
A. Arbib, “Language Within Our Grasp,” Trends Neurosci. 21:188–194 (1998).
For a brief ﬁrst overview, see Rizzolatti & Destro, “Mirror Neurons,”
Scholarpedia 3(1):2055 (2008).
16. See Rizzolatti & Destro, “Mirror Neurons”; www.scholarpedia.org/
artical/Mirror_neurons.
17. See Gallese, “The ‘Shared Manifold’ Hypothesis” (2001), for an
additional discussion, see pp. 174 of this book.
18. Jerome S. Bruner, Acts of Meaning (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1990), 40.

CHA PTER 7
. http://technology.newscientist.com/article.ns?id=mg.&
print=true.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

256

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 256

Notes to Chapter 7

. A. Cleeremans, “Computational Correlates of Consciousness,” Prog.
Brain Res. :– (). See also his “Consciousness: The Radical
Plasticity Thesis,” Prog. Brain Res. :– ().
. J. Bongard et al., “Resilient Machines Through Continuous SelfModeling,” Science :– ().
. Ibid. In particular, see also free online support material at
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full////DC. (See www.ccsl
.mae.cornell.edu/research/selfmodels/morepictures.htm for additional
online material.)
. See also Thomas Metzinger, “Empirical Perspectives from the SelfModel Theory of Subjectivity: A Brief Summary with Examples,” in Rahul
Banerjee & Bikas K. Chakrabarti, eds., Progress in Brain Research
(Amsterdam: Elsevier, ) :–. DOI: ./S–
()–.
. Karl Popper & J. C. Eccles, The Self and Its Brain: An Argument for
Interactionism (New York: Routledge, ), . Alan M. Turing’s paper is
in Mind :– ().
. It is interesting to note how perhaps the foremost theoretical “blind
spot” of current philosophy of mind is conscious suffering. Thousands of
pages have been written about color qualia and zombies, but almost no
theoretical work is devoted to ubiquitous phenomenal states such as
physical pain, boredom, or the everyday sadness known as subclinical
depression. The same is true of panic, despair, shame, the conscious
experience of mortality, and the phenomenology of losing one’s dignity.
Why are these forms of conscious content generally ignored by the best of
today’s philosophers of mind? Is it simple careerism (“Nobody wants to
read too much about suffering, no matter how insightful and important the
arguments are”), or are there deeper, evolutionary reasons for this
cognitive scotoma? When one examines the ongoing phenomenology of
biological systems on our planet, the varieties of conscious suffering are at
least as dominant as, say, the phenomenology of color vision or the
capacity for conscious thought. The ability to consciously see color
appeared only very recently, and the ability to consciously think abstract
thoughts of a complex and ordered form arose only with the advent of
human beings. Pain, panic, jealousy, despair, and the fear of dying,
however, appeared millions of years earlier and in a much greater number
of species.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 257

Notes to Chapter 9

257

CHA PTER 8
1. Our belief in invisible persons may have diﬀerent roots, possibly
including so-called hyperactive agent-detection devices (see D. Barrett,
“Exploring the Natural Foundations of Religion,” Trends Cog. Sci. 4:29–34,
2000) and ancestor cults: See Daniel C. Dennett, Breaking the Spell: Religion
as a Natural Phenomenon (New York: Viking, 2006), esp. 109ﬀ; and Thomas
Metzinger, Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2003), 371ﬀ. Also note that out-of-body experiences would
almost inevitably have contributed to early humankind’s ﬁrm belief in the
existence of invisible persons and more subtle levels of reality. See T.
Metzinger, “Out-of-Body Experiences as the Origin of the Concept of a
‘Soul,’” Mind and Matter 3(1):57–84 (2005).

CHA PTER 9
1. Y. Kamitami & S. Shimojo, “Manifestation of Scotomas Created by
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation of Human Visual Cortex,” Nature
Neuroscience 2:767–771 (1999).
2. B.-P. Bejjani et al., “Transient Acute Depression Induced by HighFrequency Deep-Brain Stimulation,” N.E. Jour. Med. 340:1476–80 (1999). Here
are examples of how the patient described her own conscious experience: “I’m
falling down in my head, I no longer wish to live, to see anything, hear
anything, feel anything.” The authors report that when she was asked why she
was crying and if she felt pain, she responded: “No, I’m fed up with life, I’ve
had enough. . . . I don’t want to live anymore, I’m disgusted with life. . . .
Everything is useless, always feeling worthless, I’m scared in this world.”
When asked why she was sad, she replied: “I’m tired. I want to hide in a
corner. . . . I’m crying over myself, of course. . . . I’m hopeless, why am I
bothering you.” Note that deep brain stimulation can also have just the
opposite eﬀect, namely, relief from serious, treatment-resistant depression.
Here is a description: “All patients spontaneously reported acute eﬀects
including ‘sudden calmness or lightness,’ ‘disappearance of the void,’ ‘sense of
heightened awareness,’ ‘connectedness,’ and sudden brightening of the room,
including a sharpening of visual details and intensiﬁcation of colors in
response to stimulation.” See H. Mayberg, “Clinical Study: Deep Brain
Stimulation for Treatment-Resistant Depression,” Neuron 45:651–660 (2005).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

258

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 258

Notes to Chapter 9

3. C. M. Cook & M. A. Persinger, “Experimental Induction of the ‘Sensed
Presence’ in Normal Subjects and an Exceptional Subject,” Percept. Mot.
Skills 85:683–693 (1997). For a critical assessment and self-experiential
report, see John Horgan, Rational Mysticism: Dispatches from the Border
Between Science and Spirituality (New York: Houghton Miﬄin, 2003).
4. See M. A. Persinger, “Religious and Mystical Experiences as Artifacts of
Temporal Lobe Function: A General Hypothesis,” Perc. Mot. Skills 57:1255–62
(1983). Clinicians have long observed a deepening of emotionality plus the
development of a serious, highly ethical and spiritual demeanor in certain
patients with chronic mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Whether this can count
as evidence for a speciﬁc kind of “personality syndrome” is still disputed. See
O. Devinsky & S. Najjar, “Evidence Against the Existence of a Temporal Lobe
Epilepsy Personality Syndrome,” Neurology 53:S13–S25 (1999); D. Blume,
“Evidence Supporting the Temporal Lobe Epilepsy Personality Syndrome,”
Neurology 53:S9–S12 (1999).
5. For more information, see the Web portal my collaborators Carsten
Griesel and Elisabeth Hildt have created at www.neuroethics.uni-mainz.de.
6. B. Maher, “Poll Results: Look Who’s Doping,” Nature 452:674–675
(2008). See also B. Sakhanian & S. Morein-Zamir, “Professor’s Little Helper,”
Nature 450:1157–5 (2007).
7. M. J. Farah et al., “Neurocognitive Enhancement: What Can We Do
and What Should We Do?” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5:421–425 (2004).
Four years later, after a careful analysis of pros and cons and perhaps
surprisingly to many, leading ﬁgures in neuroethics are now coming to the
conclusion that “We should welcome new methods of improving our brain
function. In a world in which human workspans and lifespans are increasing,
cognitive enhancement tools—including the pharmacological—will be
increasingly useful for improved quality of life and extended work
productivity, as well as to stave oﬀ normal and pathological accerelated
cognitive declines. Safe and eﬀective cognitive enhancers will beneﬁt both
the individual and society.” See H. Greely et al., “Towards Responsible Use of
Cognitive-Enhancing Drugs by the Healthy,” Nature 456:702–705 (2008).
8. For a ﬁrst and careful discussion of this important question, see T.
Douglas, “Moral Enhancement,” J. Appl. Phil. 25:228–245 (2008).
9. Alexander Shulgin and Ann Shulgin, PiHKAL: A Chemical Love Story
(Transform Press, 1991); and Alexander Shulgin, TiHKAL: The Continuation
(Transform Press, 1997).

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 259

Notes to Chapter 9

259

10. W. N. Pahnke & W. A. Richards, “Implications of LSD and
Experimental Mysticism,” Jour. Religion & Health 5:179 (1966).
11. R. R. Griﬃths et al., “Psilocybin Can Occasion Mystical-Type
Experiences Having Substantial and Sustained Personal Meaning and
Spiritual Signiﬁcance,” Psychopharm. 187:268–283 (2006).
12. R. R. Griﬃths et al., “Mystical-Type Experiences Occasioned by
Psilocybin Mediate the Attribution of Personal Meaning and Spiritual
Signiﬁcance 14 Months Later,” Jour. Psychopharm. 22:621–632 (2008).
13. N. Malleson, “Acute Adverse Reactions to LSD in Clinical and
Experimental Use in the United Kingdom,” Br. Jour. Psychiatry 118:229–230
(1971).
14. S. Cohen, “Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: Side Eﬀects and
Complications,” Jour. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 130:30–40 (1960).
15. See R. J. Strassman, “Adverse Reactions to Psychedelic Drugs: A
Review of the Literature,” Jour. Nerv. Men. Dis. 172:577–595 (1984); J. H.
Halpern & H. G. Pope, “Do Hallucinogens Cause Residual
Neuropsychological Toxicity?” Drug Alcohol Depend. 53:247–256 (1999); M.
W. Johnson et al., “Human Hallucinogen Research: Guidelines for Safety,”
Jour. Psychopharm. 22:603–620 (2008). In the most recent and
comprehensive review of the scientiﬁc literature, the authors actually make
the interesting (and perhaps bold) claim that “The incidence of psychotic
reactions, suicide attempts, and suicides during treatment with LSD […]
appears comparable to the rate of complications during conventional
psychotherapy.” See Torsten Passie et al., “The Pharmacology of Lysergic
Acid Diethylamide: A Review,” CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 14:295–314
(2008).
16. B. Vastag, “Poised to Challenge Need for Sleep, ‘Wakefulness
Enhancer’ Rouses Concerns,” Jour. Amer. Medic. Assoc. 291(2):167 (2004).
17. See Judy Illes, Neuroethics: Deﬁning the Issues in Theory, Practice, and
Policy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005); and P. R. Wolpe et al.,
“Emerging Neurotechnologies for Lie-Detection: Promises and Perils,” Amer.
Jour. Bioethics 5(2):39–49 (2005); or T. Metzinger, “Exposing Lies,” Scientiﬁc
American MIND, October/November:32–37 (2006).
18. Haim Harari, “Democracy May Be on Its Way Out” (2006),
www.edge.org/q2006/q06_2.htmlharari.

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 260

This page intentionally left blank

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 261

INDEX

Absorption capacity, 94
Accountability, 128–130
Activation-synthesis theory of
dreaming, 149, 160–161
Adaptation. See Exaptation
Agency
Alien Hand syndrome, 117, 119
attentional agency during
dreaming, 135–136
body image, 77–79
during lucid dreaming, 143
essence of selfhood, 101
freedom of the will, 126–131
hallucinating, 122–126
lucid dreaming, 139
manipulation of, 219
out-of-body experiences, 92
phantom limbs, 111–112
subpersonal level of information
processing, 209
AIM modes of sleep, 149–150
Akinetic mutism, 121
Alien Hand syndrome, 115–122
Altered states, 2, 217–218. See also
Dreaming; Lucid dreaming;
Meditation; Out-of-body
experiences
Amnesia, 160

Amputation, phantom limbs and,
108–114
Anarchy, State, and Utopia
(Nozick), 198
Anger, 169
Animal consciousness, 16
emotional Ego development,
165–166
ethics of an artificial Ego
machine, 193
evolution of, 54, 78–81
mirror-neuron systems, 166–169
neuroethics in animal studies,
231
sleep-wake cycle, 154–155
social cognition, 177–178
Anscombe, Elizabeth, vi
Antrobus, John, 155
Appearance of a world, 17–19
artificial Ego machine, 192
consciousness as, 15–17
dreaming, 135
evolution of consciousness,
57–62
Reality Model, 47
temporal sense of presence,
37–38
virtual organs, 57–59
261

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

262

Index

Apperceptive agnosia, 27–28
Aristotle, 30, 113
Armel, K.Carrie, 76
Artificial consciousness, 187–201,
197–201
Artificial Ego machine, 190–197
Artificial intelligence (AI), 155,
187–188
Artificial limbs, 3–5
Association for the Scientific Study
of Consciousness (ASSC), 17
Asterognosia, 28
Astral limbs, 3–5
Attention
attentional agency, 119–120,
135–136
attentional focus, 135
attentional processing, 42, 67
subtle body concept, 86
Auditory perception
Ineffability Problem, 49–50
phenomenology of out-of-body
experiences, 94
Augustine, 34–35
Authoritarian regimes, 238
Autism, 177
Autonomous self-model, 163–164
Autotopagnosia, 28
Awakening, 134–135, 145–146, 208
Baars, Bernard J., 16, 35, 55–56
Behavioral space, 78–79, 137–138
Behaviorism, 17–18
Beta-oscillations, 68–69
Biological self, 8
brain involvement in dreaming,
151–152
consciousness as an evolving
biological phenomenon,
15–17
developing a consciousness
culture, 239–240

Page 262

dreaming, 153–154
experiential Now, 34–40
free will, 130–131
metabolic price of cognitive
capacity, 43–44
mortality, 210–211
phenomenal content of mental
representation, 10–11
social correlates of the
phenomenal Ego, 163–166
temporal sense of presence, 38
virtual window of presence,
39–40
Biorobots, 188–189
Black market, 230–231
Blackmore, Susan J., 87
Blake, William, 45
Blanke, Olaf, 6, 95–96, 98
Blickstrahl der Aufmerksamkeit (ray
of attention), 119–120
Blind individuals, dreaming and,
137
Bliss Machine, 197–201
Body constancy, 77
Body image, 75–82
Alien Hand, 115–122
essence of selfhood, 101–104
mind-body problem, 208
out-of-body experiences, 83(fig.)
phantom limbs, 108–114
subtle body concept, 86
See also Out-of-body experiences
Body schema, 78–81
Body semantics, 173
Body temperature, sleep and, 154
Bongard, Josh, 189
Borderline personality disorder, 94
Botvinick, Matthew, 3, 76–77
Brain, conscious, 20
Brain activity
dream state, 138, 153–154, 157
lucid dreaming, 145

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 263

Index
mirror-neuron system
phenomenology, 169
objective observation of brain
states, 62–63
out-of-body experiences, 97(fig.)
social cognition, 183
Brain fingerprinting, 231–232
Brentano, Franz, 30
Broca’s area, 119, 152, 173
Brugger, Peter, 112–114
Bruner, Jérôme S., 178
Buddhism, 86
Camus, Albert, 196
Canonical neurons, 167
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 27
Causal density concept, 28–29
Causal nature of dream state,
156–157
Cephalon, 229
Chalmers, David J., 17–18, 159
Children
false beliefs, 178
folk psychology, 180
lack of autonomous self-model,
163–164
Christianity, 86
Churchland, Paul M., 52, 53–54
Classical theories of consciousness,
25–26
Cleeremans, Axel, 189
Cockroaches, 188(fig.)
Cognitive agency, 120
Cognitive enhancement, 221–231
Cognitive neuroscience, 179,
209–213
Cognitive processes, 16–17
dream interpretation, 156
experiential Now, 39
metabolic price of cognitive
capacity, 43–44
mirror-neuron system, 169–171

263

phantom limbs, 111–112
social cognition, 177–179
subtle body concept, 86
virtual organs, 56–59
Cognitive subject, 120
A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness
(Baars), 35
Cohen, Jonathan, 3, 76–77
Coherence of consciousness, 29–30,
67–68, 69
Color, perception of, 20–21, 48–54,
56, 62
Commercialization of
consciousness, 219–221
Communication of knowledge, 181
Computational correlates of
consciousness, 189
Computational goal of conscious
experience, 58–59
Computer games, 8–9, 81, 106–107
Confessions (Augustine), 34–35
Confirmation bias, 9
Confusion, 196, 197, 199, 203
Conscience, 25–26, 165–166
Conscientia, 25–26
Conscious experience, 1
artificial Ego machine, 192
as interface with virtual
environment, 104–105
conscious will and Hallucinating
Agency, 123
conscious will and the
experiential Now, 39
Consciousness Revolution, 212
controlling one’s body, 106
dream state, 150
Ego Tunnel metaphor, 6–9
extent of free will, 127
history of, 54
Ineffability Problem, 49
integration, 26–29
lucid dreaming, 139–148

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

264

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 264

Index

Conscious experience (continued)
manipulation of, 219–221
Metzinger Test for, 201–202
mirror neurons, 167–173
sense of body ownership, 75–82
sleep-wake cycle, 154–156
uniqueness of, 217
virtual organs, 57–59
Who Problem, 62–65
Conscious Experience (Metzinger,
ed.), 17–18
Conscious information, 44–45
Consciousness
as the appearance of a world,
15–16
evolution of the contents of,
17–19
global-workspace metaphor,
55–56
primary and secondary, 154–155
PSM content, 4–12
self-experience as, 80
self-knowledge and the future of
Homo sapiens, 212–217
unity of, 26–34
Consciousness culture, 237–240
Consciousness ethics, 233–237
Consistency principle of will, 124
Cosmetic psychopharmacology, 221
Cotard’s syndrome, 2, 63–64
Culture
consciousness as a culturally
embedded phenomenon,
18–19
consequences of consciousness
theories, 54
developing a consciousness
culture, 237–240
mirror-neuron systems, 179–180
neuroanthropology and the
future of Homo sapiens,
213–217

phenomenology of free will,
128–130
social cognition, 180–182
Cybernetics, 188–189
Damasio, Antonio, 5
Daydreaming, 37–38, 60
De anima (Aristotle), 113
Deceit, 211
Dehaene, Stanislas, 31
Dennett, Daniel C., vi, 50, 157
Depersonalization disorder, 94
Diamond body, 86
Dignity, 240
Disconnection syndrome, 152
Discriminating and identifying
perceptual values, 48–54
Disembodiment, 97
Disintegration, 96
Display behavior, 37
The Doors of Perception (Huxley), 45,
224–225
Dream machine, 155
Dreaming, 1, 135
attentional agency, 135–136
binding of contents, 30
color experience, 21
conscious experience during, 150
evolution of consciousness, 60
evolutionary function of,
152–156
false awakening, 134–135,
145–146
Freudian hypotheses, 159–161
Hobson’s theories and models,
149–150
lucid dream connection to
ordinary dreaming, 156–158
lucid dreaming, 139–148
mind-body connection, 150–152
phenomenology of, 134–139
temporal sense of presence, 37–38

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 265

Index
The Dreaming Brain (Hobson), 145
Drug use, 221–231
Dualism, 84, 85–86
Dynamical core hypothesis, 28
Dynamical self-organization, 208
Eccles, John C., 194
Edelman, David B., 16
Edelman, Gerald M., 153
Education, neuroethics and,
235–237
Effort, sense of, 120–121
Ego
Alien Hand syndrome, 119
developing the emotional Ego,
164
dreaming, 135–139
Ego machines, 187–188
essence of selfhood, 101–104
extent of free will, 126–127
goal states, 116
immortality and, 211
OBEs and the locus of identity, 92
out-of-body experiences, 85
phantom limbs, 111–112
PSM content defining, 4–5, 6, 7
subjective consciousness, 11–12
virtual reality and, 105
Ego machine, 208–209, 210
Ego Tunnel. See Conscious
experience
Electromagnetic stimulation,
219–220
Eliminative materialism, 53–54, 159
Eliminative phenomenalism,
147–148
Embodied simulation, 170–171,
176–177, 179–180
Emotions, 1
artificial Ego machine, 193,
195–196
Bliss Machine, 197–201

265

body image, 77–78
developing the emotional Ego,
163–166
during dreaming, 136, 156, 160
essence of selfhood, 101–102
immortality and, 211
mirror-neuron systems, 168–169
of postbiotic systems, 203–204
shared manifold, 175
Empathy, 1
creating multiple Egos and
perspectives, 164–165
Ineffability Problem, 51
mirror-neuron system, 166–173
shared manifold, 175
social cognition, 180–181
subjectivity of conscious
experience, 62
Enoch, M. David, 63–64
Epilepsy
creating religious ecstasy, 220
hallucinating agency, 122–123
out-of-body experiences, 91,
95–98
unity of consciousness, 29–30
Episodic memory, 60
Ethics, 3
artificial Ego machine, 193,
194–197
Bliss Machine, 197–201
cognitive enhancement, 221–231
consciousness ethics, 233–237
dignity and, 240
lie detection, 231–232
neuroanthropology, 213–215
Etymological roots of notion or
“concept,” 172–173
Evolution
conscious will and agency, 125
consciousness, 15–17
depth of experiential states,
199–200

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

266

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 266

Index

Evolution (continued)
Ego and virtual reality, 104–107
emotional Ego, 165–166
empathy, 169–170
exaptation, 81
false awakening and, 135
function of dreaming, 152–156
inventing consciousness, 54–62
lack of intent, 210
metabolic price of cognitive
capacity, 43–44
postbiotic systems, 202–205
self-modeling machines, 189–191
self-world border, 64–65
social cognition, 178–179
tool use, 78–81
Exaptation, 81, 170–171
Exclusivity principle of will, 124
Executive consciousness, 120
Experience Machine, 198, 200, 226
Experiential nature of the self, 3–12
Experiential Now, 34–41, 47–48, 85,
192
External interactions, 4–5, 96
Extrastriate body-area, 97
Eye movements during lucid
dreaming, 144

essence of self, 103–104
heautoscopy, 93
Ineffability Problem, 52–54
out-of-body experiences, 85, 89,
92
phenomenal Ego, 7, 10, 11–12
postbiotic systems, 190–197
self-knowledge and the future of
Homo sapiens, 212–217
visual memory, 87–88
Who Problem, 62–65
Flanagan, Owen, 159
Flight simulator, 107–108
Folk psychology, 178, 180
Free will, 1, 80
Alien Hand syndrome, 117–118
conscious experience of
intention, 127–128
during dreaming, 136
extent of freedom, 126–131
manipulation of, 219
phenomenology of, 128–130
Freud, Sigmund, 158–161
Full immersion, 104
Full-body illusions, 6
Function cluster of neurons, 28–29
Functional analysis, 194

Fabbri-Destro Maddalena, 172
False awakening, 133, 134–135,
145–146
Farah, Martha J., 222
Fear, 169
Feathers, exaptation of, 81
Feature-binding, 33–34, 66–71
Feeling of a presence, 95
Feigl, Herbert, 150
Figure-background segregation, 32–33
First-person perspective
creating multiple Egos and
perspectives, 164–165

Gallese, Vittorio, 170, 173, 174–183
Gamma-band oscillations, 32–34,
68–69
Gaze shifts, 144–145
Genetic fallacy, 204
German philosophical traditions, 84
Geschwind, Norman, 152
Gestalt, 27, 32–37, 125, 192
Global availability: evolution of
consciousness, 59–61
Global ownership, 102
Global phase-synchrony, 32–34
Global-workspace metaphor, 55–56

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 267

Index
Glomeruli, 10
Glorified body, 86
Goals, 130–131
Goal-states, 116–117, 118, 167, 193
Good Friday experiment, 225–226
Graded phenomenon, consciousness
as, 17–19
Grasping a concept, 172–173
Grünbaum, Adolf, 156
Gregory, Richard, 35
Griffiths, Roland R., 225–226
Group interests, 129–130
Haggard, Patrick, 124
Hallucinations
autoscopic, 93
color experience, 21
dreaming, 160
evolution of consciousness, 60
hallucinating agency, 122–126
inducing religious ecstasy, 220
naive realism, 46–47
OBEs and, 92
phantom limbs, 108–114
virtual out-of-body experiences,
98–101
Hallucinogenic drugs, 221–231
Hand movements, 173
Happiness, 197–201, 226
Harari, Haim, 238
Hardware, 188
Havelock, Eric A. 180–181
Heautoscopy, 93
High-amplitude gamma activity,
32–34
Higher-order representations, 42
High-level attention, 48
Histrionics, 94
Hobson, J. Allan, 145, 149–161
Husserl, Edmund, 119–120
Huxley, Aldous, 45, 224–225

267

Hybrid biorobots, 188–189
Identification: essence of self, 102
Image of self, 7, 212–217
Imitation, 180
Immortality, 211, 213–217
Immune response, 56–57
Ineffability Problem, 48–54
Infinity optics, 107
Information processing
Ego machines, 187–188
free will and, 130–131
integration, 26–29
naive realism, 44–45
neurological function of
phenomenal experience,
55–56
neuronal activity associated with,
70
recurrent connections, 31–33
self-model theory of subjective
experience, 86
simultaneity of, 35–38
subpersonal level of, 209
virtual organs, 56–59
Innate body model, 112(fig.), 113
Integration, 26–34, 41–43
Intention. See Agency; Free will
Intentionality, 179
Internal interactions, 4–5, 7
conscious experience as, 21–22
experiential Now, 34–40
out-of-body experiences, 96
self/world border, 64–65
temporal sense of presence, 38
Internet
consciousness ethics, 234
drug market, 222–224, 229
metasemantic, 205
Interoceptive body perception,
77–78

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

268

Index

Intersubjectivity, 169–171
Introspective identity criteria, 50
Irreducibility of consciousness, 63
Istigkeit, 224–225, 228
James, William, 38
Just noticeable difference (JND), 48
Keller, Helen, 137
Ketamine, 84–85
Knowledge, consciousness as, 25–26
Kremer, Stéphane, 122
LaBerge, Stephen, 143–144, 157
Lamme, Victor, 31
Language development, 173,
179–180, 182
Lenggenhager, Bigna, 6, 98
Lewis, Clarence Irving, 50
Light body, 86
Limb loss, 189
Lipps, Theodor, 171
Lipson, Hod, 189
Location, 77–79, 102
Locus of identity, 92
Long-term memory, 136
LSD, 227
Lucid dreaming, 1, 2, 139–148,
156–158
Lutz, Antoine, 32, 33
Lying, 231–232
Macaques, 78–81, 105–106
Machine consciousness, 1
Magritte, René, 98
Manipulation of consciousness,
219–221
Marathon runner, OBEs in, 91
Materialism, 53–54, 84, 214–215
Maximally determinate value, 50
McCarley, Robert W., 149

Page 268

Media hygiene, 236–237
Meditation
cognitive agency, 120
combating neuromarketing,
235–236
essence of selfhood, 101–102
One-World problem, 32–34
Memory, 34, 60, 108–114, 136, 143
Mescaline, 224–225
Metabolic price of cognitive
capacity, 43–44, 58
Metacognitive deficit, 139
Metamers, 20
Metaphors, 209
Metarepresentations, 43–44
Meta-self, 80
Metzinger Test for consciousness,
201–202
Mimesis, 180
Mind concept, 86
Mind-body problem, 83–84, 119,
150–151
Mirror neurons, 167–173, 175–181
Mitchell, Silas Weir, 108
Modafinil, 229
Monism, 150–151
Monkeys, 78–81, 105–106, 166,
177–178, 187
Moral conscience, 26
Moral development, 165–166
Motor gestalt, 125
Motor infection, 172
Motor mimicry, 172
Motor representation, 171
Motor vocabulary, 166–167
Multinational corporations, 238
Music, 36, 51
Mysterianism, 18
Mystical experience, 64
Naive realism, 40–48, 192–193

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 269

Index
Nature magazine, 221
Neural correlate of consciousness
(NCC), 11
causal density concept, 28–29
consciousness as a graded
phenomenon, 17–19
discovering the, 47–48
neural forms of altered states,
218
neural research of consciousness
content, 69–70
neuroethics of studying, 231–232
sense of effort, 121
Neural networks
complexity and capacity of, 217
hybrid biorobots, 188–189
shared manifold, 176
Neural processing
body schema, 78–81
feature-binding, 66–71
global neural correlate of
consciousness (GNCC),
47–48, 69–70
OBE work, 87
phenomenal shadows, 22–23
rubber-hand illusion, 3–5, 75–77,
81, 98–101
self-designed Ego Tunnels,
220–221
Neuroanthropology, 212, 213,
239–240
Neurodynamic tool. See Phenomenal
self-model
Neuroethics. See Ethics
Neurological disorders
agency and sense of self, 121
akinetic mutism, 121
Alien Hand syndrome, 116
Neuromarketing, 235
Neurophysiology
feature-binding, 66–71

269

of altered states, 217–218
out-of-body experiences, 91–92,
95–98
Neuropsychology
brain involvement in dreaming,
151–152
nature of free will, 130–131
phantom limbs, 108–114
Neuroscience of consciousness
dream state, 157
dynamical core hypothesis,
28–29
Freudian hypotheses of
dreaming, 159–161
Ineffability Problem, 52–54
integration, 26–34
lucid dreaming, 145
manipulating content of
consciousness, 219–221
metabolic price of cognitive
capacity, 43–44
mirror neurons, 167–173
philosophical connection to, 159
social neuroscience, 166–167,
166–173
spiritual vacuum, 212–214
Nicolelis, Miguel A. L., 106
Nightmares, 142–143
Nova Dreamer, 142
Now, experiential, 34–41, 47–48, 85,
192
Nozick, Robert, 198, 226
Object-directed action, 166–173
Objectification of aesthetic pleasure,
171–172
Objective reality, 9
Olfactory perception, 10, 20, 45, 51,
62, 136–137
One-World Problem, 26–34, 37,
47–48

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

270

9:29 AM

Index

Ong, Walter J., 180
Opacity of conscious representation,
46
Optical illusions, 46–47
Organ, consciousness as, 56–59
Ott, Ulrich, 33
Out-of-body experiences (OBEs),
5–6, 133–135
autoscopic phenomena related
to, 92–94
epilepsy and, 95–98
essence of selfhood, 101–104
experimental efforts at
producing, 83–85
external reality, 10
first-person narrative of, 87–91
neurobiological instances, 91–92
out-of-brain experiences, 23
phenomenology of, 94
self-model theory of subjective
experience, 85–88
self-motion during, 87–89
sense of self, 131
virtual out-of-body experiences,
98–101
Out-of-brain experiences, 9–10, 23,
207
Ownership, sense of
Alien Hand syndrome, 115–122,
117, 119
artificial Ego machine, 193
attentional agency during
dreaming, 135–136
body image, 77–79
global ownership, 102
phantom limbs, 111–112
rubber-hand illusion, 75–82
Oxygen deprivation, 27
Pahnke, Walter N., 225–226
Pain, 169

Page 270

Parallel realities, 27
Perception
conscious brain, 20–21
consciously perceiving, 30–31
experiential Now, 39
sense of body ownership, 75–82
See also Sensory experience
Perceptual values, discriminating
and identifying, 48–54
Persinger, Michael, 219
Personality traits, out-of-body
experiences and, 94
Perspective. See First-person
perspective; Point of view;
Third-person perspective
PGO waves, 138, 160
Phantom limbs, 108–114, 131, 189
Pharmacological neurotechnology,
221–231
Phenomenal consciousness, 38
Phenomenal experience
evolution of consciousness, 58
neurological function of, 55–56
out-of-body experiences, 5–6
See also Out-of-body experiences
Phenomenal self-model (PSM), 5–12
agency and sense of self, 121–122
Alien Hand syndrome, 115–116
as neurodynamic tool, 115
children’s lack of autonomous
self-model, 163–164
conscious experience of thoughts
and emotions, 16–17
evolution of empathy, 170
phenomenology of free will,
128–129
rubber-hand illusion, 4–5
soul as OBE-PSM, 85–86
virtual reality, 104–107
See also Self-model
Phenomenal shadows, 22–23

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 271

Index
Phenomenological pessimism, 199
Phenotechnology, 221–231
Philosophical ideal of selfknowledge, 203
Philosophy
Alien Hand syndrome, 117–118
Bliss Machine, 199–200
contribution to cognitive
neuroscience, 159
eliminative phenomenalism,
147–148
emergence of the self-conscious
mind, 16
essence of selfhood, 101–104
evolutionary function of
dreaming, 153–154
extent of free will, 126–127
mind-body problem, 83–84
neurobiological solutions for
philosophical questions, 71
out-of-body phenomenology,
85–86
perception versus action, 167
postbiotic philosopher, 201–205
simulation, 176
social cognition, 182–183
understanding and neutralizing
suffering, 196–197
PiHKAL: A Chemical Love Story
(Shulgin and Shulgin), 223
Pixel perception, 41–42
Plastic nature of dream state, 156–157
Plato, 22, 224–225
Point of view, 7
experiential Now, 38–39
of an artificial Ego machine, 193
second-person perspective,
164–165
See also First-person perspective;
Third-person perspective
Pöppel, Ernst, 36

271

Popper, Karl R., 194
Postbiotic systems, 190–197,
201–205
Practical intentionality, 116
Prefrontal lobotomy, 151
Pre-lucid dreams, 143
Presence, 37–38, 95, 104, 105
Presence journal, 137
Present moment, 34–40
Primary consciousness, 154–155
Primates. See Animal consciousness;
Monkeys
Priority principle of will, 124
Prophetic meaning of dreams, 156
Proprioception, 76, 96
Psilocybin, 225–226, 227–228
Psychiatric disorders
Alien Hand syndrome, 117–118
chemically induced psychosis,
227–228
Cotard’s syndrome, 2, 63–64
out-of-body experiences and, 94
RBD disorder, 138
schizophrenia, 91, 117–118, 121
subjectivity of conscious
experience, 63–64
unity of consciousness, 27–28
Psychoactive substances, 219,
221–231
Psychological evolution, 211
Psychological moment, 34
Psychosis, chemically induced,
227–228
Putnam, Hilary, 202
Qualia, 50–51, 52, 70
Raffman, Diana, 49–50
Rainbow body, 86
Ramachandran, Vilayanur S., 76,
108–114

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

272

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 272

Index

Ray of attention, 119–120
RBD disorder, 137–138
Realism, naive, 40–48
Reality
conscious and physical, 6–7
consciousness as an evolving
biological phenomenon,
15–17
evolution of consciousness,
58–62
lucid dreaming and the nature of,
146–148
OBEs as models of, 87–88
Reality checks, 141
Reality generation, 59
Reality Problem, 47–48
Reality tunnel, 8–9
Reciprocal interaction model, 149
Recurrent connections, 31–33
Recursion, 179
Reductionism, 18, 52, 159
Religious and spiritual experience
and intellectual honesty, 212, 240
as different, 211
chemically induced, 219,
225–228, 230
creating, 219–220
ethereal body (OBE), 86, 98
neuroanthropology and the
future of Homo sapiens,
213–217
selflessness of, 64
REM sleep, 137–138, 142, 144, 149,
150–151, 154–155, 157, 160
Representation
body image and sense of
ownership, 77–79
evolution of consciousness, 61–62
goal representations, 130
metarepresentation of conscious
states, 31

of the world, 9
of time, 40
out-of-body experiences, 5–6
phantom limbs and body image,
113
transparency of phenomenal
representations, 41–48
Representational content, 62–63,
194
La reproduction interdite (painting),
98
Republic (Plato), 22
Responsibility, social, 128–130
Resurrection body, 86
Retribution, 128–130
Revonsuo, Antti, 9, 23
Ritalin, 221–222
Rizzolatti, Giacomo, 166
Robot arm, 80–81, 105–106, 187
Robot society, free will and, 129–130
Rubber-hand illusion, 3–5, 75–77,
81, 98–101
Ruhnau, Eva, 36
Ryle, Gilbert, 83
Schizophrenia
agency and sense of self, 121
Alien Hand syndrome, 117–118
OBEs and, 91
Schizotypy, 94
Science, consciousness, 20
Science fiction, 41–43, 53
Scotoma, artificial, 219
Secondary consciousness, 154–155
Second-person perspective, 164–165
Self, 11
The Self and Its Brain (Popper and
Eccles), 194
Self-conscious minds, 16
Selfhood
artificial Ego machine, 192–193

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 273

Index
essence of, 101–104
out-of-body experiences, 85
rubber-hand illusion, 77–79
Self-identification, 101
Self-knowledge, philosophical ideal
of, 203
Self-localization, 101
Self-model
artificial Ego machine, 187,
190–191(figs.), 195–196
as physical process, 208–209
conscious experience as interface,
104–105
ethics of lie detection, 232
lucid dreaming, 145
moral development, 165–166
out-of-body experiences, 92,
95–98
phantom limbs, 111–112
social neuroscience, 166–173
See also Phenomenal self-model
Self-model theory of subjectivity,
7–8, 46, 81–82
Self-modeling machines, 189–191
Self-representation: canonical
neurons, 167
Sense of effort, 120–121
Sense of ownership. See Ownership,
sense of
Sensory experience
during dreaming, 136
during lucid dreaming, 143
experiencing and observing pain,
169
of artificial Ego machines, 195–196
virtual organs, 56–59
See also Auditory perception;
Olfactory perception; Tactile
perception; Visual perception
Sensory integration, body image
and, 75–77

273

Seth, Anil K., 16
Shadow metaphor, 22
Shadows in out-of-body experiences,
92
Shanks, Roger, 155
Shared manifold, 173, 174–183
Shattered worlds, 28
Short-term memory, 34, 67, 136, 141
Shulgin, Alexander, 223
Shulgin, Ann, 223
Simulation, embodied, 170–171,
176–177, 179–180
Simultaneity of information
processing, 35–38
Singer, Wolf, 32, 66–71
Slave robot, 105–106
Sleep. See Dreaming; Lucid
dreaming; Out-of-body
experiences
Sleep-wake cycle, 154–155
Smeared present, 38, 40
Smell, sense of, 10, 20, 45, 51, 62,
136–137
Social cognition
mirror-neuron systems, 168–169,
180–182
phenomenological aspects of,
182–183
shared manifold, 175
theory of mind, 177–179
Social correlates of the phenomenal
Ego, 163–166
Social institution, free will as,
128–130
Social neuroscience, 166–173
Software, 188
Solipsism, 145–146
Solms, Mark, 159–161
Somatoform dissociation, 94
Soul concept, 84, 85–86, 113,
212–215

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

274

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 274

Index

Sound. See Auditory perception
Space of attentional agency, 44–45
Specious present, 38
Spinoza, Baruch, 113
Starfish, artificial, 189, 190–191(figs.)
Stickgold, Robert, 149
Stroke patients, dreaming and,
151–152
Students, OBEs in, 91
Subjective experience
biological nature of, 208–209
Bliss Machine, 197–201
color perception, 20–21
discriminating and identifying
perceptual values, 48–54
dreaming, 150–151
experiential Now, 39–40
first-person perspective, 11
investigating the science of, 158
mirror-neuron systems, 168–169
naive realism, 44–45
neuronal activity associated with,
69–70
phenomenal content of mental
representation, 10–11
postbiotic and biological,
203–204
self-model theory of, 86
Who Problem, 62–65
Subjectivity, self-model of, 7–8
Subpersonal brain, 127
Subpersonal information processing,
209
Subsymbolic information
processing, 209
Subtle body, 86
Suffering, 193, 195–197, 199, 203, 231
Sufism, 86
Supracelestial body, 86
Synchrony, 29–30, 32–34, 68
Synthetic phenomenology, 189

Tactile perception
integrating touch and sight in
tool use, 78–81
mirror-neuron system, 169
out-of-body experiences, 88–89,
96
rubber-hand illusion, 3–5, 75–77,
81, 98–101
transparency of phenomenal
representations, 41–46
virtual organs, 57
Taoism, 86
Task acquisition, 56
Taste: blindness and dreaming,
137
Telepresence, 105–106
Television, 41–43
Temporal domain
evolution of consciousness, 60
Now problem, 34–40
”self-less” forms of conscious
experience, 64
transparency of phenomenal
representations, 41–48
Temporal gestalt, 36–38
Temporal-lobe theory of religious
experience, 220
Temporo-parietal junction (TPJ),
96–97
Theoretical entities, 52
Theory of consciousness
classical theories, 25–26
Evolution Problem, 54–62
Ineffability Problem, 48–54
naive realism, 40–48
Now problem, 34–41
One-World Problem, 26–34, 37,
47–48
Reality Problem, 47–48
Who Problem, 62–65
Theory of mind, 177–178

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

Page 275

Index
Third-person perspective
appearance of free will, 129
Ineffability Problem, 52–54
out-of-body experiences, 83, 92
subjectivity of conscious
experience, 62–65
visual memory, 87–88
Tholey, Paul, 146
TiHKAL: The Continuation
(Shulgin), 223
Time: experiential Now, 34–40
Time travel, 60
Tononi, Giulio, 28, 153
Tool use, 78–81, 187
Total flight simulator, 106–108
Transparency
artificial Ego machine, 192–193
Bliss Machine, 198–199
conscious experience of
intention, 127
emergency of self, 207–208
ethics of lie detection, 232
evolution of consciousness,
59–61
naive realism, 41–48
of postbiotic systems, 203
of the self-model, 7–8
transparent phenomenal states, 16
Trans-tunnel communication,
144–145
Trethowan, William, 63–64
Truth, 200–201
Tryptamines, 223
Tunnel concept. See Conscious
experience
Turing, Alan M., 194
2001: A Space Odyssey (movie), 41–43
Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes
(Enoch and Trethowan),
63–64

275

Unconscious self and processes
dreaming, 159–160
extent of free will, 127
motor vocabulary, 166–167
synchrony, 29–30
Unity of consciousness, 26–34, 69
Vajrayana, 86
van Eeden, Frederick, 139
Vestibular information, 96
Vestibulo-motor sensations, 88–89
Video games, 8–9, 81, 106
Violent dreams, 138
Virtual body, 105, 172
Virtual interface, 104
Virtual limbs, 3–5
Virtual organs, 56–59
Virtual out-of-body experiences,
98–101
Virtual reality
dream state, 137
Ego Tunnel, 8–9
interface for, 104–107
phantom limbs, 108–114
virtual out-of-body experiences,
98–101
Virtual window of presence, 39–40
Virtual world, 104–108
Visual memory, 87–88
Visual perception
apperceptive agnosia, 27–28
blindness and dreaming, 137
canonical neurons, 167
dreaming, 137, 152
essence of self, 102
Ineffability Problem, 48–54, 56
integrating touch and sight in
tool use, 78–81
optical illusions, 46–47
out-of-body experiences, 87–89,
94, 96

0465045679-Metzinger:Layout 1

2/3/09

9:29 AM

276

Page 276

Index

Visual perception (continued)
recurrent connections, 31–33
rubber-hand illusion, 3–5, 75–77,
81, 98–101
transparency of phenomenal
representations, 41–48
Vocabulary, motor, 166–167

Wegner, Daniel M., 123–124
Wernicke’s area, 152
Wheatley, Thalia, 123–124
Who Problem, 62–65
Working memory, 34
World-binding function, 28
World-zero hypothesis, 61

Waelti, Ernst, 89–90, 92
Waking, 134–135, 145–148, 208

Zombies, 26
Zykov, Victor, 189

