Further praise for Being You:
‘A wide-ranging synthesis pulling together disparate strands from
philosophy, science, literature, personal experience and speculation – this
latter being the most exciting for me, despite some proposals being as yet
unproven. Seth proposes to explain not just what and how we are, but –
probably provocative for some folks – why we are the way we are. Why
do we have the feeling of continually being the same person? (When
obviously I, at least, am not.) Why do we have this feeling of being selfaware? What is it for? Hugely inspirational.’ David Byrne
‘Truly compelling … The treatment of consciousness on offer is eclectic
and delivered with a particular kind of generosity … A potent account of
embodied sentience and selfhood. An account that is rendered irresistible
by the author’s gentle and inclusive arguments.’ Professor Karl Friston,
University College London (the world’s most cited neuroscientist)
‘A fascinating book. A joy to read. Anil Seth explores fundamental
questions about consciousness and the self from the perspective of a
philosophically informed neuroscientist. Highly recommended.’ Nigel
Warburton, author of A Little History of Philosophy
‘A wonderfully accessible and comprehensive account of how our minds
capture the world, and how that makes us who we are.’ Sean Carroll,
author of Something Deeply Hidden
‘What makes you, you? What explains your consciousness and sense of
self? In this remarkable and groundbreaking work, Anil Seth offers a
surprising answer, rooted in the new science of the predictive brain.
Compulsory reading for anyone who wants to better understand their
inner “beast machine”.’ Andy Clark, author of Surfing Uncertainty
‘In this lucid and thought-provoking exploration of the nature of
consciousness, Seth takes us closer than ever to making sense of our
experience of being conscious selves. A must-read.’ Anil

Ananthaswamy, award-winning journalist and author of Through Two
Doors at Once and The Man Who Wasn’t There
‘Seth is uniquely placed to truly advance our understanding of one of
humanity’s deepest riddles.’ Chris Anderson, Curator of TED
‘Anil Seth is one of the world’s leading consciousness researchers – his
take on the subject is unique and refreshing, and his talks and writing
always exciting, accessible, and engaging.’ Christof Koch, President and
Chief Scientific Officer of the Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle

ANIL SETH

Being You
A New Science of Consciousness

The Brain—is wider than the Sky—
For—put them side by side—
The one the other will contain
With ease—and You—beside—
Emily Dickinson

For my mother, Ann Seth,
and in memory of my father,
Bhola Nath Seth

Contents
Title Page
Epigraph
Dedication
Prologue
I: LEVEL
1: The Real Problem
2: Measuring Consciousness
3: Phi
II: CONTENT
4: Perceiving from the Inside Out
5: The Wizard of Odds
6: The Beholder’s Share
III: SELF
7: Delirium
8: Expect Yourself
9: Being a Beast Machine
10: A Fish in Water
11: Degrees of Freedom
IV: OTHER
12: Beyond Human
13: Machine Minds
Epilogue
Acknowledgements

References
Index
About the Author
Copyright

Prologue
Five years ago, for the third time in my life, I ceased to exist. I was
having a small operation and my brain was filling with anaesthetic. I
remember sensations of blackness, detachment, and falling apart …
General anaesthesia is very different from going to sleep. It has to be;
if you were asleep, the surgeon’s knife would quickly wake you up.
States of deep anaesthesia have more in common with catastrophic
conditions like coma and the vegetative state, where consciousness is
completely absent. Under profound anaesthesia, the brain’s electrical
activity is almost entirely quietened – something that never happens in
normal life, awake or asleep. It is one of the miracles of modern medicine
that anaesthesiologists can routinely alter people’s brains so that they
enter and return from such deeply unconscious states. It’s an act of
transformation, a kind of magic: anaesthesia is the art of turning people
into objects.
The objects, of course, get turned back into people. So I returned,
drowsy and disoriented but definitely there. No time seemed to have
passed. Waking from a deep sleep, I am sometimes confused about the
time, but there is always the impression that at least some amount of time
has gone by, of a continuity between my consciousness then and my
consciousness now. Under general anaesthesia, things are different. I
could have been under for five minutes, five hours, five years – or even
fifty. And ‘under’ doesn’t quite express it. I was simply not there, a
premonition of the total oblivion of death, and, in its absence of anything,
a strangely comforting one.
General anaesthesia doesn’t just work on your brain, or on your mind.
It works on your consciousness. By altering the delicate electrochemical
balance within the neural circuitry inside your head, the basic ground
state of what it is to ‘be’ is – temporarily – abolished. In this process lies
one of the greatest remaining mysteries in science, and in philosophy too.
Somehow, within each of our brains, the combined activity of billions
of neurons, each one a tiny biological machine, is giving rise to a
conscious experience. And not just any conscious experience, your
conscious experience, right here, right now. How does this happen? Why
do we experience life in the first person?

I have a childhood memory of looking in the bathroom mirror, and for
the first time realising that my experience at that precise moment – the
experience of being me – would at some point come to an end, and that
‘I’ would die. I must have been about eight or nine years old, and like all
early memories it is unreliable. But perhaps it was at this moment that I
also realised that if my consciousness could end, then it must depend in
some way on the stuff I was made of – on the physical materiality of my
body and my brain. It seems to me that I’ve been grappling with this
mystery, in one way or another, ever since.
As an undergraduate student at Cambridge University in the early
nineties, a teenage romance with physics and philosophy broadened into
a fascination with psychology and neuroscience, even though at the time
these fields seemed to avoid, even outlaw, all mention of consciousness.
My PhD research took me on a long and unexpectedly valuable detour
through artificial intelligence and robotics, before a six-year stint at the
Neurosciences Institute in San Diego, on the shores of the Pacific, finally
delivered the chance to investigate the brain basis of consciousness
directly. There, I worked with the Nobel Laureate Gerald Edelman – one
of the most significant figures in bringing consciousness back into view
as a legitimate scientific focus.
Now, for more than a decade, I’ve been Co-Director of a research
centre – the Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science at the University
of Sussex – nestled among the gentle green hills of the South Downs by
the seaside city of Brighton. Our Centre brings together neuroscientists,
psychologists, psychiatrists, brain imagers, virtual reality wizards and
mathematicians, and philosophers, all of us trying to open new windows
onto the brain basis of conscious experience.
—
Whether you’re a scientist or not, consciousness is a mystery that
matters. For each of us, our conscious experience is all there is. Without
it there is nothing at all: no world, no self, no interior and no exterior.
Imagine that a future version of me, perhaps not so far away, offers
you the deal of a lifetime. I can replace your brain with a machine that is
its equal in every way, so that from the outside, nobody could tell the

difference. This new machine has many advantages – it is immune to
decay, and perhaps it will allow you to live forever.
But there’s a catch. Since even future-me is not sure how real brains
give rise to consciousness, I can’t guarantee that you will have any
conscious experiences at all, should you take up this offer. Maybe you
will, if consciousness depends only on functional capacity, on the power
and complexity of the brain’s circuitry, but maybe you won’t, if
consciousness depends on a specific biological material – neurons, for
example. Of course, since your machine-brain leads to identical
behaviour in every way, when I ask new-you whether you are conscious,
new-you will say yes. But what if, despite this answer, life – for you – is
no longer in the first person?
I suspect you wouldn’t take the deal. Without consciousness, it may
hardly matter whether you live for another five years or another five
hundred. In all that time there would be nothing it would be like to be
you.
Philosophical games aside, the practical importance of understanding
the brain basis of consciousness is easy to appreciate. General
anaesthesia has to count as one of the greatest inventions of all time. Less
happily, distressing disturbances of consciousness can accompany brain
injuries and mental illnesses for the increasing number of us, me
included, who encounter these conditions. And for each one of us,
conscious experiences change throughout life, from the blooming and
buzzing confusion of early life, through the apparent though probably
illusory and certainly not universal clarity of adulthood, and on to our
final drift into the gradual – and for some, disorientingly rapid –
dissolution of the self as neurodegenerative decay sets in. At each stage
in this process you exist, but the notion that there is a single unique
conscious self (a soul?) that persists over time may be grossly mistaken.
Indeed, one of the most compelling aspects of the mystery of
consciousness is the nature of self. Is consciousness possible without selfconsciousness, and if so would it still matter so much?
Answers to difficult questions like these have many implications for
how we think about the world and the life it contains. When does
consciousness begin in development? Does it emerge at birth, or is it
present even in the womb? What about consciousness in non-human
animals – and not just in primates and other mammals, but in

otherworldly creatures like the octopus and perhaps even in simple
organisms such as nematode worms or bacteria? Is there anything it is
like to be an Escherichia coli, or a sea bass? What about future
machines? Here, we ought to be concerned not just about the power that
new forms of artificial intelligence are gaining over us, but also about
whether and when we need to take an ethical stance towards them. For
me, these questions evoke the uncanny sympathy I felt when watching
Dave Bowman destroy HAL’s personality in the film 2001: A Space
Odyssey, by the simple act of removing its memory banks, one by one. In
the greater empathy elicited by the plight of Ridley Scott’s replicants in
Blade Runner there is a clue about the importance of our nature as living
machines for the experience of being a conscious self.
—
This book is about the neuroscience of consciousness: the attempt to
understand how the inner universe of subjective experience relates to,
and can be explained in terms of, biological and physical processes
unfolding in brains and bodies. This is the project that has captivated me
throughout my career, and I believe it has now reached a point at which
glimmerings of answers are beginning to emerge.
These glimmerings already change, and change dramatically, how we
think about conscious experiences of the world around us, and of
ourselves within it. The way we think about consciousness touches every
aspect of our lives. A science of consciousness is nothing less than an
account of who we are, of what it is to be me, or to be you, and of why
there is anything it is like to ‘be’ at all.
The story I will tell is a personal view, shaped over many years of
research, contemplation, and conversation. The way I see it,
consciousness won’t be ‘solved’ in the same way that the human genome
was decoded, or the reality of climate change established. Nor will its
mysteries suddenly yield to a single eureka-like insight – a pleasant but
usually inaccurate myth about how scientific understanding progresses.
For me, a science of consciousness should explain how the various
properties of consciousness depend on, and relate to, the operations of the
neuronal wetware inside our heads. The goal of consciousness science
should not be – at least not primarily – to explain why consciousness

happens to be part of the universe in the first place. Nor should it be to
understand how the brain works in all its complexity, while sweeping the
mystery of consciousness away under the carpet. What I hope to show
you is that by accounting for properties of consciousness, in terms of
mechanisms in brains and bodies, the deep metaphysical whys and hows
of consciousness become, little by little, less mysterious.
I use the word ‘wetware’ to underline that brains are not computers
made of meat. They are chemical machines as much as they are electrical
networks. Every brain that has ever existed has been part of a living
body, embedded in and interacting with its environment – an
environment which in many cases contains other embodied brains.
Explaining the properties of consciousness in terms of biophysical
mechanisms requires understanding brains – and conscious minds – as
embodied and embedded systems.
In the end, I want to leave you with a new conception of the self – that
aspect of consciousness which for each of us is probably the most
meaningful. An influential tradition, dating back at least as far as
Descartes in the seventeenth century, held that non-human animals lacked
conscious selfhood because they did not have rational minds to guide
their behaviour. They were ‘beast machines’: flesh automatons without
the ability to reflect on their own existence.
I don’t agree. In my view, consciousness has more to do with being
alive than with being intelligent. We are conscious selves precisely
because we are beast machines. I will make the case that experiences of
being you, or of being me, emerge from the way the brain predicts and
controls the internal state of the body. The essence of selfhood is neither
a rational mind nor an immaterial soul. It is a deeply embodied biological
process, a process that underpins the simple feeling of being alive that is
the basis for all our experiences of self, indeed for any conscious
experience at all. Being you is literally about your body.
This book is divided into four parts. In the first part, I explain my
approach to the scientific study of consciousness. This part also deals
with the question of conscious ‘level’ – of how conscious someone or
something can be – and with progress in attempts to ‘measure’
consciousness. The second part takes on the topic of conscious ‘content’
– of what you are conscious of, when you are conscious. Part three turns
the focus inwards, to the self, and to all the varied experiences that

conscious selfhood entails. The fourth and final part – ‘other’ – explores
what this new way of understanding consciousness can say about other
animals, and about the possibility of sentient machines. By the end of the
book, you’ll understand that our conscious experiences of the world and
the self are forms of brain-based prediction – ‘controlled hallucinations’
– that arise with, through, and because of our living bodies.
—
Despite his tarnished reputation among neuroscientists, Sigmund Freud
was right about many things. Looking back through the history of
science, he identified three ‘strikes’ against the perceived self-importance
of the human species, each marking a major scientific advance that was
strongly resisted at the time. The first was by Copernicus, who showed
with his heliocentric theory that the Earth rotates around the sun, and not
the other way around. With this dawned the realisation that we are not at
the centre of the universe; we are just a speck somewhere out there in the
vastness, a pale blue dot suspended in the abyss. Next came Darwin, who
revealed that we share common ancestry with all other living things, a
realisation that is – astonishingly – still resisted in some parts of the
world even today. Immodestly, Freud’s third strike against human
exceptionalism was his own theory of the unconscious mind, which
challenged the idea that our mental lives are under our conscious, rational
control. While he may have been off target in the details, Freud was
absolutely right to point out that a naturalistic explanation of mind and
consciousness would be a further, and perhaps final, dethronement of
humankind.
These shifts in how we see ourselves are to be welcomed. With each
new advance in our understanding comes a new sense of wonder, and a
new ability to see ourselves as less apart from, and more a part of, the
rest of nature.
Our conscious experiences are part of nature just as our bodies are,
just as our world is. And when life ends, consciousness will end too.
When I think about this, I am transported back to my experience – my
non-experience – of anaesthesia. To its oblivion, perhaps comforting, but
oblivion nonetheless. The novelist Julian Barnes, in his meditation on

mortality, puts it perfectly. When the end of consciousness comes there is
nothing – really nothing – to be frightened of.
Notes
meditation on mortality: Barnes (2008).

I
LEVEL

1
The Real Problem
What is consciousness?
For a conscious creature, there is something that it is like to be that
creature. There is something it is like to be me, something it is like to be
you, and probably something it is like to be a sheep, or a dolphin. For
each of these creatures, subjective experiences are happening. It feels like
something to be me. But there is almost certainly nothing it is like to be a
bacterium, a blade of grass, or a toy robot. For these things, there is
(presumably) never any subjective experience going on: no inner
universe, no awareness, no consciousness.
This way of putting things is most closely associated with the
philosopher Thomas Nagel, who in 1974 published a now legendary
article called ‘What is it like to be a bat?’ in which he argued that while
we humans could never experience the experiences of a bat, there
nonetheless would be something it is like for the bat, to be a bat.* I’ve
always favoured Nagel’s approach because it emphasises
phenomenology: the subjective properties of conscious experience, such
as why a visual experience has the form, structure, and qualities that it
does, as compared to the subjective properties of an emotional
experience, or of an olfactory experience. These properties are sometimes
also called qualia in philosophy: the redness of red, the pang of jealousy,
the sharp pain or dull throb of a toothache.
For an organism to be conscious, it has to have some kind of
phenomenology for itself. Any kind of experience – any
phenomenological property – counts as much as any other. Wherever
there is experience, there is phenomenology; and wherever there is
phenomenology, there is consciousness. A creature that comes into being
only for a moment will be conscious just as long as there is something it
is like to be it, even if all that’s happening is a fleeting feeling of pain or
pleasure.

We can usefully distinguish the phenomenological properties of
consciousness from its functional and behavioural properties. These refer
to the roles that consciousness may play in the operations of our minds
and brains, and to the behaviours an organism is capable of, by virtue of
having conscious experiences. Although the functions and behaviours
associated with consciousness are important topics, they are not the best
places to look for definitions. Consciousness is first and foremost about
subjective experience – it is about phenomenology.
This may seem obvious, but it wasn’t always so. At various times in
the past, being conscious has been confused with having language, being
intelligent, or exhibiting behaviour of a particular kind. But
consciousness does not depend on outward behaviour, as is clear during
dreaming and for people suffering states of total bodily paralysis. To hold
that language is needed for consciousness would be to say that babies,
adults who have lost language abilities, and most if not all non-human
animals lack consciousness. And complex abstract thinking is just one
small part – though possibly a distinctively human part – of being
conscious.
Some prominent theories in the science of consciousness continue to
emphasise function and behaviour over phenomenology. Foremost
among these is the ‘global workspace’ theory, which has been developed
over many years by the psychologist Bernard Baars and the
neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene, among others. According to this theory,
mental content (perceptions, thoughts, emotions, and so on) becomes
conscious when it gains access to a ‘workspace’, which – anatomically
speaking – is distributed across frontal and parietal regions of the cortex.
(The cerebral cortex is the massively folded outer surface of the brain,
made up of tightly packed neurons. † ) When mental content is broadcast
within this cortical workspace, we are conscious of it, and it can be used
to guide behaviour in much more flexible ways than is the case for
unconscious perception. For example, I am consciously aware of a glass
of water on the table in front of me. I could pick it up and drink it, throw
it over my computer (tempting), write a poem about it, or take it back
into the kitchen now that I realise it’s been there for days. Unconscious
perception does not allow this degree of behavioural flexibility.
Another prominent theory, called ‘higher-order thought’ theory,
proposes that mental content becomes conscious when there is a ‘higher-

level’ cognitive process that is somehow oriented towards it, rendering it
conscious. On this theory, consciousness is closely tied to processes like
metacognition – meaning ‘cognition about cognition’ – which again
emphasises functional properties over phenomenology (though less so
than global workspace theory). Like global workspace theory, higherorder thought theories also emphasise frontal brain regions as key for
consciousness.
Although these theories are interesting and influential, I won’t have
much more to say about either in this book. This is because they both
foreground the functional and behavioural aspects of consciousness,
whereas the approach I will take starts from phenomenology – from
experience itself – and only from there has things to say about function
and behaviour.
The definition of consciousness as ‘any kind of subjective experience
whatsoever’ is admittedly simple and may even sound trivial, but this is a
good thing. When a complex phenomenon is incompletely understood,
prematurely precise definitions can be constraining and even misleading.
The history of science has demonstrated many times over that useful
definitions evolve in tandem with scientific understanding, serving as
scaffolds for scientific progress, rather than as starting points, or ends in
themselves. In genetics, for example, the definition of a ‘gene’ has
changed considerably as molecular biology has advanced. In the same
way, as our understanding of consciousness develops, its definition – or
definitions – will evolve too. If, for now, we accept that consciousness is
first and foremost about phenomenology, then we can move on to the
next question.
—
How does consciousness happen? How do conscious experiences relate
to the biophysical machinery inside our brains and our bodies? How
indeed do they relate to the swirl of atoms or quarks or superstrings, or to
whatever it is that the entirety of our universe ultimately consists in?
The classic formulation of this question is known as the ‘hard
problem’ of consciousness. This expression was coined by the Australian
philosopher David Chalmers in the early 1990s, and it has set the agenda

for much of consciousness science ever since. Here is how he describes
it:
It is undeniable that some organisms are subjects of experience. But
the question of how it is that these systems are subjects of experience
is perplexing. Why is it that when our cognitive systems engage in
visual and auditory information-processing, we have visual or
auditory experience: the quality of deep blue, the sensation of middle
C? How can we explain why there is something it is like to entertain
a mental image, or to experience an emotion? It is widely agreed that
experience arises from a physical basis, but we have no good
explanation of why and how it so arises. Why should physical
processing give rise to a rich inner life at all? It seems objectively
unreasonable that it should, and yet it does.
Chalmers contrasts this hard problem of consciousness with the socalled easy problem – or easy problems – which have to do with
explaining how physical systems, like brains, can give rise to any number
of functional and behavioural properties. These functional properties
include things like processing sensory signals, selection of actions and
the control of behaviour, paying attention, the generation of language,
and so on. The easy problems cover all the things that beings like us can
do and that can be specified in terms of a function – how an input is
transformed into an output – or in terms of a behaviour.
Of course, the easy problems are not easy at all. Solving them will
occupy neuroscientists for decades or centuries to come. Chalmers’ point
is that the easy problems are easy to solve in principle, while the same
cannot be said for the hard problem. More precisely, for Chalmers there
is no conceptual obstacle to easy problems eventually yielding to
explanations in terms of physical mechanisms. By contrast, for the hard
problem it seems as though no such explanation could ever be up to the
job. (A ‘mechanism’ – to be clear – can be defined as a system of
causally interacting parts that produce effects.) Even after all the easy
problems have been ticked off, one by one, the hard problem will remain
untouched. ‘[E]ven when we have explained the performance of all the
functions in the vicinity of experience – perceptual discrimination,
categorization, internal access, verbal report – there may still remain a

further unanswered question: Why is the performance of these functions
accompanied by experience?’
The roots of the hard problem extend back to ancient Greece, perhaps
even earlier, but they are particularly visible in René Descartes’
seventeenth-century sundering of the universe into mind stuff, res
cogitans, and matter stuff, res extensa. This distinction inaugurated the
philosophy of dualism, and has made all discussions of consciousness
complicated and confusing ever since. This confusion is most evident in
the proliferation of different philosophical frameworks for thinking about
consciousness.
Take a deep breath, here come the ‘isms’.
My preferred philosophical position, and the default assumption of
many neuroscientists, is physicalism. This is the idea that the universe is
made of physical stuff, and that conscious states are either identical to, or
somehow emerge from, particular arrangements of this physical stuff.
Some philosophers use the term materialism instead of physicalism, but
for our purposes they can be treated synonymously.
At the other extreme to physicalism is idealism. This is the idea –
often associated with the eighteenth-century Bishop George Berkeley –
that consciousness or mind is the ultimate source of reality, not physical
stuff or matter. The problem isn’t how mind emerges from matter, but
how matter emerges from mind.
Sitting awkwardly in the middle, dualists like Descartes believe that
consciousness (mind) and physical matter are separate substances or
modes of existence, raising the tricky problem of how they ever interact.
Nowadays few philosophers or scientists would explicitly sign up for this
view. But for many people, at least in the West, dualism remains
beguiling. The seductive intuition that conscious experiences seem nonphysical encourages a ‘naïve dualism’ where this ‘seeming’ drives beliefs
about how things actually are. As we’ll see throughout this book, the way
things seem is often a poor guide to how they actually are.
One particularly influential flavour of physicalism is functionalism.
Like physicalism, functionalism is a common and often unstated
assumption of many neuroscientists. Many who take physicalism for
granted also take functionalism for granted. My own view, however, is to
be agnostic and slightly suspicious.

Functionalism is the idea that consciousness does not depend on what
a system is made of (its physical constitution), but only on what the
system does, on the functions it performs, on how it transforms inputs
into outputs. The intuition driving functionalism is that mind and
consciousness are forms of information processing which can be
implemented by brains, but for which biological brains are not strictly
necessary.
Notice how the term ‘information processing’ sneaked in here
unannounced (as it also did in the quote from Chalmers a few pages
back). This term is so prevalent in discussions of mind, brain, and
consciousness that it’s easy to let it slide by. This would be a mistake,
because the suggestion that the brain ‘processes information’ conceals
some strong assumptions. Depending on who’s doing the assuming, these
range from the idea that the brain is some kind of computer, with mind
(and consciousness) being the software (or ‘mindware’), to assumptions
about what information itself actually is. All of these assumptions are
dangerous. Brains are very different from computers, at least from the
sorts of computers that we are familiar with. And the question of what
information ‘is’ is almost as vexing as the question of what
consciousness is, as we’ll see later on in this book. These worries are
why I’m suspicious of functionalism.
Taking functionalism at face value, as many do, carries the striking
implication that consciousness is something that can be simulated on a
computer. Remember that for functionalists, consciousness depends only
on what a system does, not on what it is made of. This means that if you
get the functional relations right – if you ensure that a system has the
right kind of ‘input–output mappings’ – then this will be enough to give
rise to consciousness. In other words, for functionalists, simulation
means instantiation – it means coming into being, in reality.
How reasonable is this? For some things, simulation certainly counts
as instantiation. A computer that plays Go, such as the world-beating
AlphaGo Zero from the British artificial intelligence company
DeepMind, is actually playing Go. But there are many situations where
this is not the case. Think about weather forecasting. Computer
simulations of weather systems, however detailed they may be, do not get
wet or windy. Is consciousness more like Go or more like the weather?
Don’t expect an answer – there isn’t one, at least not yet. It’s enough to

appreciate that there’s a valid question here. This is why I’m agnostic
about functionalism.
There are two more ‘isms’, then we’re done.
The first is panpsychism. Panpsychism is the idea that consciousness
is a fundamental property of the universe, alongside other fundamental
properties such as mass/energy and charge; that it is present to some
degree everywhere and in everything. People sometimes make fun of
panpsychism for claiming things like stones and spoons are conscious in
the same sort of way that you or I are, but these are usually deliberate
misconstruals designed to make it look silly. There are more
sophisticated versions of the idea, some of which we will meet in later
chapters, but the main problems with panpsychism don’t lie with its
apparent craziness – after all, some crazy ideas turn out to be true, or at
least useful. The main problems are that it doesn’t really explain anything
and that it doesn’t lead to testable hypotheses. It’s an easy get-out to the
apparent mystery posed by the hard problem, and taking it on ushers the
science of consciousness down an empirical dead end.
Finally, there’s mysterianism, which is associated with the philosopher
Colin McGinn. Mysterianism is the idea that there may exist a complete
physical explanation of consciousness – a full solution to Chalmers’ hard
problem – but that we humans just aren’t clever enough, and never will
be clever enough, to discover this solution, or even to recognise a
solution if it were presented to us by super-smart aliens. A physical
understanding of consciousness exists, but it lies as far beyond us as an
understanding of cryptocurrency lies beyond frogs. It is cognitively
closed to us by our species-specific mental limitations.
What can be said about mysterianism? There may well be things we
will never understand, thanks to the limitations of our brains and minds.
Already, no single person is able to fully comprehend how an Airbus
A380 works. (And yet I’m happy to sit in one, as I did one time on the
way home from Dubai.) There are certainly things which remain
cognitively inaccessible to most of us, even if they are understandable by
humans in principle, like the finer points of string theory in physics.
Since brains are physical systems with finite resources, and since some
brains seem incapable of understanding some things, it seems
inescapable that there must be some things which are the case, but which
no human could ever understand. However, it is unjustifiably pessimistic

to pre-emptively include consciousness within this uncharted domain of
species-specific ignorance.
One of the more beautiful things about the scientific method is that it
is cumulative and incremental. Today, many of us can understand things
that would have seemed entirely incomprehensible even in principle to
our ancestors, maybe even to scientists and philosophers working just a
few decades ago. Over time, mystery after mystery has yielded to the
systematic application of reason and experiment. If we take mysterianism
as a serious option we might as well all give up and go home. So, let’s
not.
These ‘isms’ provide different ways of thinking about the relationship
between consciousness and the universe as a whole. When weighing their
merits and demerits, it’s important to recognise that what matters most is
not which framework is ‘right’ in the sense of being provably true, but
which is most useful for advancing our understanding of consciousness.
This is why I tend towards a functionally agnostic flavour of physicalism.
To me, this is the most pragmatic and productive mindset to adopt when
pursuing a science of consciousness. It is also, as far as I am concerned,
the most intellectually honest.
—
Despite its appeal, physicalism is by no means universally accepted
among consciousness researchers. One of the most common challenges
to physicalism is the so-called ‘zombie’ thought experiment. The
zombies in question here are not the brain-munching semi-corpses from
the movies – our zombies are ‘philosophical zombies’. But we need to
get rid of them all the same, since otherwise the prospect of a natural,
physicalist explanation of consciousness is dead in the water before we
get started.
A philosophical zombie is a creature that is indistinguishable from a
conscious creature, but which lacks consciousness. A zombie Anil Seth
would look like me, act like me, walk like me and talk like me, but there
would be nothing it is like to be it, no inner universe, no felt experience.
Ask zombie Anil if he is conscious, and he will say, ‘Yes, I’m conscious.’
Zombie Anil would even have written various essays on the neuroscience
of consciousness, including some thoughts about the questionable

relevance of philosophical zombies to this topic. But none of this would
involve any conscious experience whatsoever.
Here’s why the zombie idea is supposed to provide an argument
against physicalist explanations of consciousness. If you can imagine a
zombie, this means you can conceive of a world that is indistinguishable
from our world, but in which no consciousness is happening. And if you
can conceive of such a world, then consciousness cannot be a physical
phenomenon.
And here’s why it doesn’t work. The zombie argument, like many
thought experiments that take aim at physicalism, is a conceivability
argument, and conceivability arguments are intrinsically weak. Like
many such arguments, it has a plausibility that is inversely related to the
amount of knowledge one has.
Can you imagine an A380 flying backwards? Of course you can. Just
imagine a large plane in the air, moving backwards. Is such a scenario
really conceivable? Well, the more you know about aerodynamics and
aeronautical engineering, the less conceivable it becomes. In this case,
even a minimal knowledge of these topics makes it clear that planes
cannot fly backwards. It just cannot be done.‡
It’s the same with zombies. In one sense it’s trivial to imagine a
philosophical zombie. I just picture a version of myself wandering
around without having any conscious experiences. But can I really
conceive this? What I’m being asked to do, really, is to consider the
capabilities and limitations of a vast network of many billions of neurons
and gazillions of synapses (the connections between neurons), not to
mention glial cells and neurotransmitter gradients and other such
neurobiological goodies, all wrapped into a body interacting with a world
which includes other brains in other bodies. Can I do this? Can anyone
do this? I doubt it. Just as with the A380, the more one knows about the
brain and its relation to conscious experiences and behaviour, the less
conceivable a zombie becomes.§
Whether something is conceivable or not is often a psychological
observation about the person doing the conceiving, not an insight into the
nature of reality. This is the weakness of zombies. We are asked to
imagine the unimaginable, and through this act of illusory
comprehension conclusions are drawn about the limits of physicalist
explanation.

—
We’re now ready to meet what I call the real problem of consciousness.
This is a way of thinking about consciousness science that has taken
shape for me over many years, assimilating and building on the insights
of many others. Addressing the real problem is, I believe, the approach
by which a science of consciousness is most likely to succeed.
According to the real problem, the primary goals of consciousness
science are to explain, predict, and control the phenomenological
properties of conscious experience. This means explaining why a
particular conscious experience is the way it is – why it has the
phenomenological properties that it has – in terms of physical
mechanisms and processes in the brain and body. These explanations
should enable us to predict when specific subjective experiences will
occur, and enable their control through intervening in the underlying
mechanisms. In short, addressing the real problem requires explaining
why a particular pattern of brain activity – or other physical process –
maps to a particular kind of conscious experience, not merely
establishing that it does.
The real problem is distinct from the hard problem, because it is not –
at least not in the first instance – about explaining why and how
consciousness is part of the universe in the first place. It does not hunt for
a special sauce that can magic consciousness from mere mechanism (or
the other way around). It is also distinct from the easy problem(s),
because it focuses on phenomenology rather than on function or
behaviour. It doesn’t sweep the subjective aspects of consciousness away
under the carpet. And because of its emphasis on mechanisms and
processes, the real problem aligns naturally with a physicalist worldview
on the relationship between matter and mind.
To clarify these distinctions, let’s ask how the different approaches
might attempt to explain the subjective experience of ‘redness’.
From an easy problem perspective, the challenge is to explain all the
mechanistic, functional, and behavioural properties associated with
experiencing redness: how specific wavelengths of light activate the
visual system, the conditions under which we say things like ‘that object
is red’, typical behaviour at traffic lights, how red things sometimes
induce emotional responses of a particular kind, and so on.

Left untouched by the easy problem approach, by design, is any
explanation of why and how these functional, mechanistic, and
behavioural properties should be accompanied by any phenomenology
whatsoever – in this case, the phenomenology of ‘redness’. The existence
of subjective experience, as opposed to no experience, is the dominion of
the hard problem. No matter how much mechanistic information you’re
given, it will never be unreasonable for you to ask, ‘Fine, but why is this
mechanism associated with conscious experience?’ If you take the hard
problem to heart you will always suspect an explanatory gap between
mechanistic explanations and the subjective experience of ‘seeing red’.
The real problem accepts that conscious experiences exist and focuses
primarily on their phenomenological properties. For example:
experiences of redness are visual, they usually but not always attach to
objects, they seem to be properties of surfaces, they have different levels
of saturation, they define a category among other colour experiences
though they can smoothly vary within that category, and so on.
Importantly, these are all properties of the experience itself, not – at least
not primarily – of the functional properties or behaviours associated with
that experience. The challenge for the real problem is to explain, predict,
and control these phenomenological properties, in terms of things
happening in the brain and body. We would like to know what it is about
specific patterns of activity in the brain – such as the complex looping
activity in the visual cortex¶ – that explains (and predicts, and controls)
why an experience, such as the experience of redness, is the particular
way it is, and not some other way. Why it is not like blueness, or
toothache, or jealousy.
Explanation, prediction, and control. These are the criteria by which
most other scientific projects are assessed, regardless of how mystifying
their target phenomena might initially appear. Physicists have made
enormous strides in unravelling the secrets of the universe – in
explaining, predicting, and controlling its properties – but are still
flummoxed when it comes to figuring out what the universe is made of or
why it exists. In just the same way, consciousness science can make great
progress in shedding light on the properties and nature of conscious
experiences without it being necessary to explain how or why they
happen to be part of the universe in which we live.

Nor should we necessarily expect scientific explanations always to be
intuitively satisfying. In physics, quantum mechanics is notoriously
counterintuitive but is nonetheless widely accepted as providing our
current best grip on the nature of physical reality. It could equally be that
a mature science of consciousness will allow us to explain, predict, and
control phenomenological properties without ever delivering the intuitive
feeling that ‘yes, this is right, of course it has to be this way!’
Importantly, the real problem of consciousness is not an admission of
defeat to the hard problem. The real problem goes after the hard problem
indirectly, but it still goes after it. To understand why this is so, let me
introduce the ‘neural correlates of consciousness’.
—
It still amazes me how disreputable consciousness science was, even just
thirty years ago. In 1989, one year before I started my undergraduate
degree at Cambridge University, the leading psychologist Stuart
Sutherland wrote: ‘Consciousness is a fascinating but elusive
phenomenon. It is impossible to specify what it is, what it does, or why it
evolved. Nothing worth reading has been written on it.’ This damning
summary appeared in no lesser place than the International Dictionary of
Psychology, and it captures the attitude to consciousness that I often
encountered in my first steps into academia.
Elsewhere, far away from Cambridge and though I did not know it at
the time, the situation was more promising. Francis Crick (the codiscoverer, with Rosalind Franklin and James Watson, of the molecular
structure of DNA) and his colleague Christof Koch, who were both based
in San Diego in California, were setting out what would become the
dominant method in the rise of consciousness science – the search for the
neural correlates of consciousness.
The gold-standard definition of a neural correlate of consciousness, or
NCC, is ‘the minimal neuronal mechanisms jointly sufficient for any one
specific conscious percept’. The NCC approach proposes that there is
some specific pattern of neural activity that is responsible for any and
every experience, such as the experience of ‘seeing red’. Whenever this
activity is present, an experience of redness will happen, and whenever it
isn’t, it won’t.

The great merit of the NCC approach is that it offers a practical recipe
for doing research. To identify an NCC, all you need to do is concoct a
situation in which people sometimes have a particular conscious
experience, and at other times do not, while making sure that these
conditions are otherwise as closely matched as possible. Given such a
situation, you then compare activity in the brain between the two
conditions, using brain imaging methods such as functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) or electroencephalography (EEG).|| The brain
activity specific to the ‘conscious’ condition reflects the NCC for that
particular experience.
The phenomenon of ‘binocular rivalry’ offers a helpful example. In
binocular rivalry, a different image is shown to each eye – perhaps a
picture of a face to the left eye and a picture of a house to the right eye.
In this situation, conscious perception doesn’t settle on a weird facehouse chimera. It flips back and forth between the face and the house,
dwelling for a few seconds on each. First you see a house, then a face,
then a house again … and so on. What’s important here is that conscious
perception changes even though the sensory input remains constant. By
looking at what happens in the brain, it’s therefore possible to distinguish
brain activity that tracks conscious perception from activity that tracks
whatever the sensory input happens to be. The brain activity that goes
along with the conscious perception identifies the NCC for that
perception.
The NCC strategy has been impressively productive over many years,
delivering reams of fascinating findings, but its limitations are becoming
apparent. One problem is that it is difficult, and perhaps in the end
impossible, to disentangle a ‘true’ NCC from a range of potentially
confounding factors, the most important of which are those neural
happenings that are either prerequisites for, or consequences of, an NCC
itself. In the case of binocular rivalry, brain activity that goes along with
the conscious perception may also track upstream (prerequisite)
processes like ‘paying attention’ and, on the downstream side, the verbal
behaviour of ‘reporting’ – of saying that you see a house or a face.
Although related to the flow of conscious perception, the neural
mechanisms responsible for attention and verbal report – or other
prerequisites and downstream consequences – should not be confused
with those that are responsible for the conscious perception itself.

The deeper problem is that correlations are not explanations. We all
know that mere correlation does not establish causation, but it is also true
that correlation falls short of explanation. Even with increasingly
ingenious experimental designs and ever more powerful brain imaging
technologies, correlation by itself can never amount to explanation. From
this perspective, the NCC strategy and the hard problem are natural
bedfellows. If we restrict ourselves to collecting correlations between
things happening in the brain and things happening in our experience, it
is no surprise that we will always suspect an explanatory gap between the
physical and the phenomenal. But if we instead move beyond
establishing correlations to discover explanations that connect properties
of neural mechanisms to properties of subjective experience, as the real
problem approach advocates, then this gap will narrow and might even
disappear entirely. When we are able to predict (and explain, and control)
why the experience of redness is the particular way it is – and not like
blueness, or like jealousy – the mystery of how redness happens will be
less mysterious, or perhaps no longer mysterious at all.
The ambition of the real problem approach is that as we build ever
sturdier explanatory bridges from the physical to the phenomenological,
the hard-problem intuition that consciousness can never be understood in
physical terms will fade away, eventually vanishing in a puff of
metaphysical smoke. When it does we will have in our hands a
satisfactory and fully satisfying science of conscious experience.
What justifies this ambition? Consider how the scientific
understanding of life has matured over the last century or two.
—
Not so long ago, life seemed as mysterious as consciousness does today.
Scientists and philosophers of the day doubted that physical or chemical
mechanisms could ever explain the property of being alive. The
difference between the living and the non-living, between the animate
and the inanimate, appeared so fundamental that it was considered
implausible that it could ever be bridged by mechanistic explanations of
any sort.
This philosophy of vitalism reached a peak in the nineteenth century.
It was supported by leading biologists like Johannes Müller and Louis

Pasteur, and it persisted well into the twentieth century. Vitalists thought
that the property of being alive could only be explained by appealing to
some special sauce: a spark of life, an elán vital. But as we now know, no
special sauce is needed. Vitalism today is thoroughly rejected in scientific
circles. Although there are still many things about life that remain
unknown – how a cell works, for example – the idea that being alive
requires some supernatural ingredient has lost all credibility. The fatal
flaw of vitalism was to interpret a failure of imagination as an insight into
necessity. This is the same flaw that lies at the heart of the zombie
argument.
The science of life was able to move beyond the myopia of vitalism
thanks to a focus on practical progress – to an emphasis on the ‘real
problems’ of what being alive means. Undeterred by vitalistic pessimism,
biologists got on with the job of describing the properties of living
systems, and then explaining (also predicting and controlling) each of
these properties in terms of physical and chemical mechanisms.
Reproduction, metabolism, growth, self-repair, development, homeostatic
self-regulation – all became individually and collectively amenable to
mechanistic explanation. As the details became filled in – and they are
still being filled in – not only did the basic mystery of ‘what is life’ fade
away, the very concept of life ramified so that ‘being alive’ is no longer
thought of as a single all-or-nothing property. Grey areas emerged,
famously with viruses but now also with synthetic organisms and even
collections of oil droplets, each of which possess some but not all of the
characteristic properties of living systems. Life became naturalised and
all the more fascinating for having become so.
This parallel provides both a source of optimism and a practical
strategy for addressing the real problem of consciousness.
The optimism is that today’s consciousness researchers may be in a
situation similar to that facing biologists, studying the nature of life, just
a few generations ago. What counts as mysterious now may not always
count as mysterious. As we get on with explaining the various properties
of consciousness in terms of their underlying mechanisms, perhaps the
fundamental mystery of ‘how consciousness happens’ will fade away,
just as the mystery of ‘what is life’ also faded away.
Of course, the parallel between life and consciousness is not perfect.
Most conspicuously, the properties of life are objectively describable,

whereas the explanatory targets of consciousness science are subjective –
they exist only in the first person. However, this is not an insurmountable
barrier; it mostly means the relevant data, because they are subjective, are
harder to collect.
The practical strategy stems from the insight that consciousness, like
life, is not just one single phenomenon. By shifting the focus away from
life as one big scary mystery, biologists became less inclined to desire, or
to require, one humdinger eureka of a solution. Instead, they divided the
‘problem’ of life into a number of related but distinguishable processes.
Applying the same strategy to consciousness, in this book I will focus on
level, content, and self as the core properties of what being you is all
about. By doing so, a fulfilling picture of all conscious experience will
come to light.
—
Conscious level concerns ‘how conscious we are’ – on a scale from
complete absence of any conscious experience at all, as in coma or brain
death, all the way to vivid states of awareness that accompany normal
waking life.
Conscious content is about what we are conscious of – the sights,
sounds, smells, emotions, moods, thoughts, and beliefs that make up our
inner universe. Conscious contents are all varieties of perception – brainbased interpretations of sensory signals that collectively make up our
conscious experiences. (Perception, as we will see, can be both conscious
and unconscious.)
Then there’s conscious self – the specific experience of being you, and
the guiding theme of this book. The experience of ‘being a self’ is a
subset of conscious contents, encompassing experiences of having a
particular body, a first-person perspective, a set of unique memories, as
well as experiences of moods, emotions, and ‘free will’. Selfhood is
probably the aspect of consciousness that we cling to most tightly, so
tightly that it can be tempting to confuse self-consciousness (the
experience of being a self) with consciousness itself (the presence of any
kind of subjective experience, of any phenomenology, whatsoever).
In making these distinctions, I am not proposing that these aspects of
consciousness are completely independent. In fact, they are not, and

figuring out how they relate presents another significant challenge for
consciousness science.
Nonetheless, dividing up the real problem of consciousness in these
broad terms has many benefits. By providing distinct targets for
explanation, it becomes more feasible to propose possible mechanisms
able to do the required jobs of explanation, prediction, and control.
Equally important, it pushes back against the limiting idea that
consciousness is just ‘one thing’ – a single intimidating mystery that
might elude scientific explanation altogether. We will instead see how
different properties of consciousness come together in different ways,
across species and even among different people. There are as many
different ways of being conscious as there are different conscious
organisms.
Eventually, the hard problem itself may succumb, so that we will be
able to understand consciousness as being continuous with the rest of
nature without having to adopt any arbitrary ‘ism’ stating by fiat how
phenomenology and physics are related.
This is the promise of the real problem. To see how far it can take us,
read on.
Notes
global workspace theory: Baars (1988); Dehaene & Changeux (2011); Mashour et al. (2020);
Shanahan (2010).
degree of behavioural flexibility: Another way to think of global workspace theory is as a theory
of ‘access consciousness’, as compared to ‘phenomenal consciousness’. Phenomenal
consciousness refers explicitly to experience. Access consciousness emphasises cognitive
functions over experience. When a mental state is ‘access conscious’ it means that the mental
state is available for all sorts of cognitive functions including reasoning, decision making, and
the control of behaviour. See Block (2005).
higher-order thought theories: There are many varieties of higher-order theories. See R. Brown et
al. (2019); Fleming (2020); Lau & Rosenthal (2011).
definition of a gene has changed: Portin (2009).
Here is how he describes it: Chalmers (1995a), p. 201.
Chalmers contrasts this: More recently, Chalmers has introduced the ‘meta-problem’ of
consciousness, which is the problem of why people think there is a hard problem of
consciousness (Chalmers, 2018). The meta-problem is actually a version of the easy problem,
since it is about explaining behaviour – in this case the verbal behaviour of people who
express belief in a hard problem of consciousness. One thing I like about the meta-problem is
that one can appreciate that it is a problem, and study it, whatever metaphysical stance one
takes about consciousness itself.
A ‘mechanism’: Craver & Tabery (2017).

[E]ven when we have explained: Chalmers (1995a), p. 203, italics in original.
they can be treated synonymously: The difference between physicalism and materialism is largely
historical. Materialism is an older word than physicalism. Some people also argue that
physicalism is a ‘linguistic thesis’ (that every linguistic statement is equivalent to some
physical statement), whereas materialism is a more general claim about the nature of things.
See Stoljar (2017).
take physicalism for granted: Although most functionalists are physicalists, it is possible to be a
functionalist without being a physicalist.
Brains are very different: Matthew Cobb’s engrossing The Idea of the Brain (2020) relates the
history of how brain function has been interpreted using the dominant technology of the day
(and sometimes the other way around).
A computer that plays Go: Silver et al. (2017). The story of the original program, AlphaGo, is
beautifully told in a film of the same name: https://www.alphagomovie.com/. Some might
quibble that these programs are more accurately described as playing ‘the history of Go’ rather
than Go itself.
there’s a valid question: A more sophisticated version of this argument has been developed by
John Searle in his famous ‘Chinese room’ thought experiment. I didn’t use this example here
because Searle’s argument is targeted primarily at intelligence (or ‘understanding’) rather than
consciousness (Searle, 1980).
an empirical dead end: The philosopher John Perry said: ‘If you think about consciousness long
enough, you either become a panpsychist or you go into administration.’ Perhaps the problem
lies in only thinking, rather than doing (science). For an articulate defence of panpsychism, I
recommend Galileo’s Error by Philip Goff (2019). Perry’s quote appears in a 2018 article in
Quartz by Olivia Goldhill: qz.com/1184574/the-idea-that-everything-from-spoons-to-stonesare-conscious-is-gaining-academic-credibility.
mysterianism: McGinn (1989).
no human could ever understand: For an argument against the view that some things will always
lie beyond human understanding, see Deutsch (2012).
most intellectually honest: There is one more ‘ism’ which deserves mention, though it is a more
informal ‘ism’ than those discussed in the main text. Illusionism is the view that (phenomenal)
consciousness is an introspective illusion – that when we introspect about conscious states we
misrepresent them as having phenomenal properties – qualia – that in fact they do not have.
On one reading, which I disagree with, illusionism says that conscious states do not really
exist. On another, which I am more sympathetic to, illusionism says that conscious experiences
exist but are not what we think they are. It is possible, though not clear, that this reading of
illusionism is compatible with what I will say in this book. For more on illusionism see
Frankish (2017).
any conscious experience whatsoever: There are at least two types of philosophical zombie.
‘Behavioural zombies’ are indistinguishable from their conscious counterparts from the
outside – in terms of their behaviour. ‘Neurological zombies’ add the additional fantasy of
being identical to a conscious creature also from the inside. A neurological zombie has the
same internal structure, and may also be made out of the same electrochemical wetware as the
conscious creature that it is a zombie version of. All varieties of zombie entirely lack
consciousness.
a vast network: Gidon et al. (2020); Herculano-Houzel (2009).
imagine the unimaginable: Zombie defenders may respond that it is only their logical possibility
that matters, not their conceivability given the laws of physics in this particular universe. I
disagree. A backwards-flying A380 may be logically possible given alternative principles of
aerodynamics but accepting this doesn’t shed any light on how a real A380 actually flies, in

this world, with the laws of physics and aerodynamics that we actually have. What I want to
know is how a real brain (and body, and so on), abiding by the laws of physics in this universe,
actually shapes and gives rise to conscious experience in this universe.
the insights of many others: The ‘real problem’ way of putting things is not new – at least not
entirely. Chalmers himself described similar strategies in the form of the ‘mapping problem’
(Chalmers, 1996) and the ‘principle of structural coherence’ (Chalmers, 1995a), which forms
part of his original description of the hard problem. There is also a long and highly influential
body of work in ‘neurophenomenology’ which attempts to match phenomenological properties
to aspects of the brain and its activity (Thompson, 2014; Varela, 1996). There are, however,
differences in emphasis between these positions (Seth, 2009, 2016b).
Nothing worth reading has been written: Sutherland (1989).
become the dominant method: Crick & Koch (1990). Around the same time, the American
philosopher Daniel C. Dennett published his influential Consciousness Explained (1991).
Reading this book in the early 1990s was, for me, a turning point. It remains a rumbustious
and enlightening read. See LeDoux et al. (2020) and Seth (2017, 2018) for more on the history
of consciousness science.
minimal neuronal mechanisms: Crick & Koch (1990).
NCC for that particular experience: Note that NCCs are usually interpreted as relating to specific
brain regions, but this need not be the case. The definition of an NCC relates to a neural
mechanism which could be implemented across a range of brain regions. For a given NCC, the
brain circuits involved may even change over time (G. M. Edelman & Gally, 2001).
brain activity that goes along: A subtlety here is that brain regions that show up in binocular
rivalry studies are often associated with transitions between conscious perceptions, which is
important because perception of change is not the same thing as change of perception. See
Blake et al. (2014). This distinction is revisited in chapter 6.
it is difficult: These problems have been talked about for years, but were generally either
dismissed as irrelevant or otherwise swept under the carpet. Two papers from 2012 finally
crystallised the issue: Aru et al. (2012); de Graaf et al. (2012).
should not be confused: Some experiments have made valiant attempts to distinguish conscious
perception from attention, and from behavioural report. The results from so-called ‘no report’
paradigms, in which volunteers do not make behavioural reports about what they perceive, are
particularly intriguing. In many of these studies, the remaining NCC does not include the
frontal brain regions that are central to theories like the global workspace theory and higherorder thought theory. See Frässle et al. (2014); Tsuchiya et al. (2015); and Raccah et al. (2021)
for a recent discussion.
fully satisfying science: Another way of putting this ambition comes from the philosophers Susan
Hurley and Alva Noë, who distinguish between ‘comparative’ explanatory gaps, which have to
do with explaining why different experiences have the specific phenomenological properties
that they do, and the ‘absolute’ explanatory gap, which is the (hard) problem of why and how
there is such a thing as phenomenology at all. We can think of the real problem as exhaustively
addressing comparative explanatory gaps in order to resolve, and perhaps dissolve, the
absolute explanatory gap. See Hurley & Noë (2003).
Vitalists thought: Vitalism holds that ‘living organisms are fundamentally different from nonliving entities because they contain some non-physical element or are governed by different
principles than are inanimate things’ (Bechtel & Williamson, 1998). Even today a majority of
pre-school-age children tend to prefer vitalist explanations of life over other more modern
explanations (Inagaki & Hatano, 2004). The historical parallels between vitalism and the
science of consciousness have been particularly vigorously explored by the philosopher
Patricia Churchland (Churchland, 1996).

one humdinger eureka: The yearning for a eureka solution may partly account for the persistent
appeal of theories of consciousness based on quantum mechanics, most of which trace back to
the mathematician Roger Penrose’s The Emperor’s New Mind, published in 1989. While it
can’t be ruled out that some future quantum-based theory may have something useful to say
about consciousness, the attempts so far seem to me to evince a false syllogism: Quantum
mechanics is mysterious, consciousness is mysterious, therefore they must be related.
*

This paper is one of the most influential in all philosophy of mind. According to Nagel,
‘an organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something that it is like to
be that organism – something it is like for the organism’. Nagel (1974), p. 2 (italics in
original).
† Each hemisphere of the cerebral cortex has four lobes. The frontal lobes are at the front.
The parietal lobes are towards the back and off to the sides. The occipital lobes are at the
back, and the temporal lobes are at the sides, near the ears. Some people identify a fifth
lobe – the limbic lobe – deep inside the brain.
‡ A helicopter, which can fly backwards, is not a plane. I was oddly happy to discover that
the origin of the word ‘helicopter’ is not a combination of ‘heli’ and ‘copter’, as I’d
always assumed, but rather ‘helico’ (spiral) and ‘pter’ (wing). They make much more
sense now.
§ The adult human brain contains an estimated 86 billion neurons, and about a
thousandfold more connections. If you counted one connection every second it would
take you nearly 3 million years to finish. What’s more, it’s increasingly apparent that even
single neurons are capable of carrying out highly complex functions all by themselves.
¶ The visual cortex is in the occipital lobe, at the back of the brain.
|| Functional MRI (fMRI) measures a metabolic signal (blood oxygenation) related to
neural activity – it offers high spatial detail but is only indirectly related to what neurons
do. EEG measures the tiny electrical signals generated by the activity of large populations
of neurons near the cortical surface. This method tracks brain activity more directly than
fMRI, but with lower spatial specificity.

2
Measuring Consciousness
How conscious are you, right now? What makes the difference between
being conscious at all and being a chunk of living meat, or lifeless
silicon, without any inner universe? New theories and technologies are
allowing scientists, for the first time, to measure levels of consciousness.
To best understand this new research, let’s look at the roots of its
development.
In seventeenth-century Paris there was a cellar, deep, dark, and cool
beneath the Observatoire, on the left bank of the Seine. This cellar played
a surprising role in the history of science – a role that showcases the
importance of measurement in the advance of knowledge.
Philosophers and scientists of the day, though they were not yet called
scientists, were racing to develop reliable thermometers, and by doing so
to reach a physical understanding of the nature of heat. Popular
‘calorific’ theories, according to which heat was a substance that could
flow into and out of objects, were falling out of favour. Revising these
theories depended on precise experiments in which the ‘hotness’ or
‘coolness’ of objects could be systematically assessed. Such experiments
needed both a means of measuring whatever ‘heat’ was and a scale on
which different measurements could be compared. The race was on to
develop a reliable thermometer and a scale of temperature. But how
could the reliability of a thermometer be established, if not against a
well-validated scale? And how to develop a temperature scale, without
already having a reliable thermometer?
The first step in solving this conundrum was to come up with a fixed
point: an unchanging reference that could be assumed to have constant
temperature. Even this was challenging. Promising candidates such as the
boiling point of water were known to depend on factors like air pressure,
which varied with altitude and weather, and even on subtle influences
like the surface roughness of a glass vessel. It was because of frustrations
like this that, for a while, a Parisian cellar – with its apparently constant

coolness – seemed a reasonable choice for the fixed point of temperature.
(This was not the only unusual suggestion. Perhaps the strangest came
from a certain Joachim Dalencé who suggested the melting point of
butter.)
Eventually, reliable and precise mercury-based thermometers were
invented, which led to calorific theories being superseded by a new
science of thermodynamics – a revolution associated with legendary
figures such as Ludwig Boltzmann and Lord Kelvin. In thermodynamics,
temperature is a large-scale property of the movement of the molecules
within a substance; specifically, the mean molecular kinetic energy.
Faster movement, higher temperature. ‘Heat’ becomes the energy
transferred between two systems at different temperatures. Importantly,
thermodynamics did more than merely establish that mean kinetic energy
correlated with temperature – it proposed that this is what temperature
actually is. Armed with this new theory, scientists could now talk about
the temperature at the surface of the sun, and even identify an ‘absolute
zero’ at which all molecular movement, in theory, ceased. Early scales
based on measurements of particular substances (Celsius, Fahrenheit)
were replaced by a scale based on underlying physical properties (Kelvin,
named after the lord). The physical basis of temperature and heat is no
longer a mystery.
I first read this story in the book Inventing Temperature by the
historian Hasok Chang of University College London. Until then, I’d
never fully appreciated the extent to which scientific progress depends on
measurement. The history of thermometry, and its impact on our
understanding of heat, offers a vivid example of how the ability to make
detailed quantitative measurements, on a scale defined by fixed points,
has the power to transform something mysterious into something
comprehensible.
Could the same approach work for consciousness?
—
Philosophers sometimes talk about a hypothetical ‘consciousness meter’
which is able to determine whether something – another person, animal,
or perhaps machine – is conscious or not. At a conference in the 1990s,
in the heyday of the hard problem, David Chalmers took an old hairdryer

and pointed it at his head to emphasise how useful such a thing would be,
were it to exist. Point your consciousness meter at something and read off
the answer. No more mystery about how far the charmed circle of
consciousness extends.
As the temperature story shows, though, the value of measurement
lies not only in delivering yes/no answers about the presence or absence
of a property, but in making possible the quantitative experiments that
have the potential to transform scientific understanding.
If consciousness turns out to be something like temperature – which is
to say, if there is a single physical process that underlies and is identical
to ‘being conscious’ – the payoff would be spectacular. Not only would
we be able to determine ‘how conscious’ someone is, we would be able
to talk sensibly about specific ‘levels’ and ‘degrees’ of consciousness,
and about varieties of consciousness far removed from our parochial
human example.
But even if the story of consciousness turns out differently, to be less
like temperature and more like life, as I suspect it will, the ability to
make precise measurements nevertheless remains an essential step in
building explanatory bridges; in explaining, predicting, and controlling
the nature of subjective experiences. In either scenario, measurement
turns the qualitative into the quantitative, the vague into the precise.
Measurement has practical motivations too. The art of anaesthesia –
applied to more than four million people every day – involves
maintaining a patient in a temporary oblivion without overdosing them.
A reliable and precise consciousness meter would be of obvious value in
achieving this delicate balance, especially since anaesthesia is frequently
accompanied by neuromuscular blocking agents which induce a
temporary paralysis, allowing surgeons to do their work unencumbered
by muscular reflexes. And, as we’ll soon see, there is an urgent need for
new methods of deciding whether consciousness remains after severe
brain damage, when patients are given terrifying diagnoses like the
‘vegetative state’ or the ‘minimally conscious state’.
In fact, brain-based consciousness monitors have been deployed in
operating theatres for many years already. The most common is the
‘bispectral index’ monitor. While the details lie hidden beneath patents,
the basic concept is to combine a range of electroencephalographic
(EEG) measures together into a single continuously updated number, to

guide the anaesthetist during surgery. This is a fine idea, but bispectral
index monitors have remained controversial, partly because there have
been several instances where their readings have been inconsistent with
other behavioural signs of consciousness, such as patients opening their
eyes or remembering what the surgeons had been saying during an
operation. A deeper problem, when it comes to consciousness science, is
that the bispectral index is not based on any principled theory.
Over the last few years, a new generation of consciousness meters has
started to take shape – not in operating theatres but in neuroscience
laboratories. Unlike previous consciousness monitors, these new
approaches are tied closely to an emerging theoretical understanding of
the brain basis of being conscious, and they are already showing their
practical worth.
—
Measuring conscious level in humans is not the same as deciding whether
someone is awake or asleep. Conscious level is not the same thing as
physiological arousal. While the two are often highly correlated,
consciousness (awareness) and wakefulness (arousal) can come apart in
various ways, which is enough to show that they cannot depend on the
same underlying biology. When you are dreaming you are by definition
asleep, but you are having rich and varied conscious experiences. At the
other extreme lie catastrophic conditions like the vegetative state (also
now known as ‘unresponsive wakefulness syndrome’), in which a person
still cycles through sleep and wakefulness, but shows no behavioural
signs of conscious awareness: the lights are occasionally on but there’s
nobody home. The figure overleaf illustrates the relation between
awareness and wakefulness, across a variety of different conditions –
both normal and pathological.
To track conscious level, we need to ask what in the brain underlies
being conscious, as opposed to merely being awake. Could it simply be
the number of neurons involved? It doesn’t seem so. The cerebellum (the
‘little brain’ hanging off the back of your cortex) has about four times as
many neurons as the rest of the brain put together, but seems barely
involved in consciousness. There is a rare condition called cerebellar
agenesis in which people fail to develop anything like a normal

cerebellum yet still manage to lead largely normal lives. Certainly, there
is no reason to doubt that they are conscious.

Fig. 1: The relation between conscious level (awareness) and wakefulness
(arousal).

What about the overall degree of neuronal activity? Is the brain
generally more active in conscious states than in unconscious states?
Well, maybe, to some extent – but not by much. Although there are
differences in the brain’s energy consumption across conscious levels,
these differences are rather small and certainly there is no sense in which
the brain ‘shuts down’ when consciousness fades.
Consciousness instead seems to depend on how different parts of the
brain speak to each other. And not the brain as a whole: the activity
patterns that matter seem to be those within the thalamocortical system –
the combination of the cerebral cortex and the thalamus (a set of ovalshaped brain structures – ‘nuclei’ – sitting just below, and intricately
connected with, the cortex). The latest and most exciting approaches to
measuring conscious level – and distinguishing it from wakefulness – are
based on tracking and quantifying these interactions. The most ambitious
version of this idea delivers a single number that indicates how conscious
a person is. Just like a thermometer.

—
This new approach has been pioneered by the Italian neuroscientist
Marcello Massimini, initially with the renowned consciousness
researcher Giulio Tononi at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, and
more recently with his own group at the University of Milan. What they
did was simple and elegant. To test how different parts of the cortex were
talking to each other, they stimulated activity in one location and
recorded how this pulse of activity spread to other cortical regions over
space and time. They did this by combining two techniques: EEG and
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). A TMS rig is a precisely
controlled electromagnet which allows a researcher to inject a short and
sharp pulse of energy directly into the brain through the skull, while EEG
in this case is used to record the brain’s response to this zapping. It’s like
banging on the brain with an electrical hammer and listening to the echo.
Perhaps surprisingly, people are rarely aware of the TMS zap itself,
unless it does something obvious like eliciting a movement (when the
magnet is placed over the motor cortex, which controls actions) or a
simple visual flash (a ‘phosphene’ – which can happen when the visual
cortex is activated). And if the zap causes the muscles in your face and
scalp to spasm, you’ll notice the pain. But for the most part, the huge
disturbance in brain activity caused by TMS does not generate any
alteration in conscious experience at all. Maybe this is not so surprising.
It just shows we are not aware of what our neurons are doing – and why
should we be?
Even though we do not directly feel the TMS pulses, Massimini and
Tononi found that their electrical echoes could be used to distinguish
different levels of consciousness. In unconscious states, like dreamless
sleep and general anaesthesia, these echoes are very simple. There is a
strong initial response in the part of the brain that was zapped, but this
response dies away quickly, like the ripples caused by throwing a stone
into still water. But during conscious states, the response is very
different: a typical echo ranges widely over the cortical surface,
disappearing and reappearing in complex patterns. The complexity of
these patterns, across space and time, implies that different parts of the
brain – in particular the thalamocortical system – are communicating

with each other in much more sophisticated ways during conscious states
than during unconscious states.
While the difference between the two conditions is often easy to see
simply by eyeballing the data, what’s truly exciting about this work is
that the complexity of the echo can be quantified. It is possible to put a
number to it to specify the magnitude of complexity. The approach is
called ‘zap and zip’: use TMS to zap the cortex, and use a computer
algorithm to ‘zip’ the response, the electrical echo, into a single number.
The algorithm used by the ‘zip’ part is the same one used to compress
(zip) digital photos into smaller files. Any pattern, whether a photo of
your summer holiday or an electrical echo unfolding across the brain in
time and space, can be represented as a sequence of 1s and 0s. For any
non-random sequence there will be a compressed representation, a much
shorter string of numbers that can be used to fully regenerate the original.
The length of the shortest possible compressed representation is called
the algorithmic complexity of the sequence. Algorithmic complexity will
be lowest for a completely predictable sequence (such as a sequence
consisting entirely of 1s, or of 0s), highest for a completely random
sequence, and somewhere in the middle for sequences that contain some
amount of predictable structure. The ‘zip’ algorithm – which calculates
what’s called ‘Lempel-Ziv-Welch complexity’, or ‘LZW complexity’ for
short – is a popular way of estimating the algorithmic complexity for any
given sequence.
Massimini and his team called their measure of the echoes recorded in
their experiments the perturbational complexity index, or PCI. It uses
LZW complexity to provide a measure (index) of the algorithmic
complexity of the brain’s response to a perturbation – the TMS pulse.
They first validated their measure by showing that PCI values during
unconscious states, such as dreamless sleep and general anaesthesia, were
reliably lower than during a baseline conscious state of resting
wakefulness. This is reassuring, but the real power of the PCI approach is
that it defines a continuous scale, allowing more fine-grained distinctions
to be made. In a landmark study from 2013, Massimini’s team measured
the PCI values of a large number of patients with brain injuries who had
disorders of consciousness. They found that PCI magnitudes correlated
extremely well with levels of impairment, as independently diagnosed by
neurologists. For example, people in a vegetative state, where

consciousness is assumed to be absent despite preserved wakefulness,
had lower PCI scores than those in minimally conscious states, in which
behavioural signs of consciousness come and go. They were even able to
draw a dividing line between PCI values indicative of consciousness
from those suggesting its absence.
In my research group at the University of Sussex, we’ve been working
on similar methods to assess conscious level. But instead of using TMS
to inject pulses of energy into the cortex, we’ve been measuring the
algorithmic complexity of ongoing, natural – what we call ‘spontaneous’
– brain activity. Think of it as ‘zipping’ without the ‘zapping’. In a series
of studies, led by my colleague Adam Barrett and our former PhD
student Michael Schartner, we discovered that the complexity of
spontaneous cortical activity – as measured by EEG – reliably drops in
both early sleep and anaesthesia. We also found that complexity during
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep is much the same as during normal
conscious wakefulness, which makes sense because REM sleep is when
dreaming is most likely – and dreams are conscious. Massimini and his
team had found the same pattern of results with their PCI measure,
further supporting the claim that these measures are tracking conscious
level rather than wakefulness.
—
The ability to measure conscious level independently from wakefulness
is not just scientifically important, it is potentially game-changing for
neurologists, and for their patients. Massimini’s 2013 study already
demonstrates that the PCI can distinguish between the vegetative state
and the minimally conscious state. Measures like the PCI are so powerful
in this context because they do not rely on outwardly visible behaviour.
Mere wakefulness – physiological arousal – is defined in terms of
behaviour. In the clinic, neurologists typically infer wakefulness when a
person responds to sensory stimulation, like a loud noise or a pinch on
the arm. But consciousness is defined in terms of inner subjective
experience, and so can only ever be indirectly related to what can be seen
from the outside.
Standard clinical approaches to determining the conscious status of a
brain-injured patient still rely on behaviour. Typically, neurologists assess

whether a patient not only responds to sensory stimulation – the marker
of physiological arousal – but is able to interact with their environment,
by responding to commands, or by engaging in voluntary behaviour.
When a patient can obey a two-part request and clearly state their name
and the date, we infer full consciousness. The problem with this approach
is that some patients may still possess an inner life but be unable to
express it outwardly. Inferences based purely on behaviour will miss
these cases, diagnosing absence of consciousness when in fact
consciousness remains.
An extreme example is ‘locked-in syndrome’, where consciousness is
fully present despite total paralysis of the body. This rare affliction can
follow damage to the brainstem, a region at the base of the brain (and at
the top of the spinal cord) which, among other roles, mediates control of
muscles in the body and in the face. Thanks to a quirk of anatomy,
locked-in patients may still retain the ability to make limited eye
movements, opening a narrow and easily missed behavioural channel for
diagnosis and communication. A former editor of Elle magazine – JeanDominique Bauby, who became locked-in in 1995 following a brain
haemorrhage – wrote an entire book this way, The Diving Bell and the
Butterfly. So-called ‘complete’ locked-in patients lack even these
communication channels, making diagnosis even harder. When relying
on behaviour alone, it is all too easy to mistake locked-in syndrome for
the complete and permanent absence of consciousness. But put someone
like Bauby inside a brain scanner and it will be easy to see that their
overall brain activity is almost completely normal. In Massimini’s 2013
study, locked-in patients had PCI values indistinguishable from healthy
age-matched controls – indicating fully intact consciousness.
The more challenging cases arise in the grey zone between life and
death, in conditions like the vegetative state and the minimally conscious
state. In these borderlands, behavioural signs of consciousness can be
absent or inconsistent, and damage to the brain so widespread that brain
scans may also be inconclusive. It is here that measures like PCI could be
truly game-changing. When a patient has a PCI score that suggests
consciousness, even if everything else about them suggests otherwise,
then this is a patient worth a second look.
Marcello Massimini recently told me about one case where measuring
PCI made all the difference. A young man with severe head injuries had

been admitted to hospital in Milan. He remained unresponsive to simple
questions and commands, suggesting a diagnosis of vegetative state. But
his PCI was as high as a healthy, fully conscious person – a perplexing
observation, especially since he was not locked-in. The clinical team
eventually tracked down a relative, an uncle who travelled to Italy from
North Africa, where the young man’s family still lived. When this uncle
started engaging with his nephew in Arabic there was an instant
response: smiling at jokes, even giving a thumbs-up when watching a
movie. He had been conscious all along – just unresponsive in Italian.
Why this should be is hard to say. Massimini believes it might be a
strange case of ‘cultural neglect’, as if the Italian world simply did not
matter to him any more. Either way, this young man’s story could have
ended very differently without the telltale electrical echoes measured by
the PCI.
The diagnosis of residual consciousness in brain-injured patients is a
fast-moving area of medicine. Along with Massimini’s PCI, several other
methods are now migrating from the lab to the clinic. My favourite is
based on the famous – in neurology circles – ‘house tennis’ experiment
conducted by the neuroscientist Adrian Owen and his team in 2006. In
Owen’s experiment, a twenty-three-year-old woman, behaviourally
unresponsive following a traffic accident, was placed in an fMRI scanner
and given a series of verbal instructions. Sometimes she was asked to
imagine playing tennis, while at other times she was invited to imagine
walking around the rooms of her house. On the face of it, this seems a
peculiar thing to do, since patients like this are not responsive to anything
– let alone to complex verbal instructions. However, studies with healthy
people have shown that the brain regions engaged by imagining fluent
movements (like playing tennis) are highly distinct from those activated
by imagining navigating through spaces.* Remarkably, Owen’s patient
showed exactly the same pattern of brain responses, indicating that she
too was actively following the instructions by engaging in highly specific
mental imagery. It is almost impossible to conceive that anyone could do
this while unconscious, so Owen concluded that the behavioural
diagnosis of vegetative state was wrong, and that the young woman was
in fact conscious. In effect, Owen and his team had repurposed a brain
scanner to allow his patient to interact with her environment using her
brain rather than her body.

Subsequent studies have gone further still, using Owen’s method not
only for diagnosis but also for communication. In a 2010 study led by
Martin Monti, a patient who had been admitted with a diagnosis of
vegetative state was able to answer yes/no questions by imagining
playing tennis for ‘yes’ and imagining walking around their house for
‘no’. A laborious way of communicating, for sure, but a life-changing
development for those with no other way to make themselves understood.
How many unresponsive but conscious people might languish
forgotten in neurology wards and nursing homes? It is difficult to know.
Owen’s method – being older than the PCI – has been investigated more
often, with a recent analysis suggesting that between 10 and 20 per cent
of vegetative state patients might retain some form of covert
consciousness, a number which would translate into many thousands
across the world. And this may well be an underestimate. To pass the
Owen test, patients still have to understand language and engage in
extended periods of mental imagery, which some may not be able to do,
despite being conscious. It is here that new methods like PCI are
especially significant, since they promise the ability to detect residual
awareness without requiring the patient to do anything at all. Just as a
true consciousness meter should.
—
The concept of ‘level of consciousness’, as I’ve used it so far, picks out
relatively global changes in how conscious an individual is – such as the
difference between normal waking life and general anaesthesia, or being
in a vegetative state. However, there are other ways to think about what
conscious level might mean. Is a baby less conscious than an adult? Is a
tortoise less conscious than either?
There is of course a danger in thinking along these lines. Such
questions seduce us into presuming that any form of consciousness that
diverges from the healthy adult human is somehow lesser, or lower. This
way of thinking is symptomatic of the human exceptionalism that has
repeatedly plagued biology, as it has darkened the history of human
thought everywhere. Consciousness has many properties, and it is a
mistake to confuse the expression of the particular set of properties
typical of healthy adult humans with the essential nature of

consciousness in all its forms, and then to assume that it sits at the top of
a unidimensional scale. Conscious experiences surely emerge over time,
whether in the development of any single animal (human or not) or
across the vast expanse of evolution. But it’s a considerable leap to
describe either process as unfolding along a single line, or as culminating
in the adult human ideal of what it’s like to be you, or to be me. This is
one way in which the analogy between consciousness and temperature –
with which I began this chapter – may be limited.
A related question is whether consciousness is ‘all or none’ – either
the lights are on or they aren’t – or whether it is ‘graded’, with no bright
line between consciousness and its absence. This question applies equally
to emergence of consciousness in evolution or in development, as to
when returning from the oblivion of anaesthesia or dreamless sleep.
Although this question is alluring, I think it is misguided. The distinction
between ‘all or none’ and ‘graded’ consciousness doesn’t have to be
either-or. Whether in evolution, in development, in daily life, or in the
neurology ward, I prefer to think in terms of sharpish transitions from the
total absence of consciousness to the presence of at least some conscious
experience, with conscious experience then manifesting in different
degrees, perhaps along different dimensions, once the inner lights are at
least glimmering.
Take a typical adult human. Is her level of consciousness higher (or
lower) when she is dreaming than when she is sitting at her desk after a
heavy lunch, in a distracted semi-stupor? There are no straightforward
answers to questions like these. Dreaming may be ‘more conscious’ in
some ways (for example, the vividness of perceptual phenomenology)
but ‘less conscious’ in others (for example, the degree of reflective
insight into what is happening†).
An important consequence of taking multidimensional levels of
consciousness seriously is that sharp distinctions between conscious level
and conscious content disappear. It becomes meaningless to completely
separate how conscious you are from what you are conscious of. A ‘one
size fits all’ measure of consciousness – of the sort we might expect if we
take the temperature analogy too literally – may never be enough.
One example of how conscious level and conscious content interact
comes from a study we carried out a few years ago on brain activity in
the psychedelic state. Among their many uses, psychedelic drugs offer

unique opportunities for consciousness science since they induce
profound alterations in conscious contents, arising from a simple
pharmacological intervention in the brain.
The Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann, the inventor of lysergic acid
diethylamide – LSD – gives a sense of how dramatic these alterations can
be in his record of his journey home from the laboratories of the
pharmaceutical company Sandoz, in Basel, on 19 April 1943. On this
day, which is now remembered as ‘Bicycle Day’, he had decided to
swallow a small amount of his recent discovery. Shortly afterwards, he
began to feel rather unusual, and so set off home on his bike. After
somehow making it back while being assailed by all manner of
distressing experiences, and having believed he was going insane, he lay
down on his sofa and closed his eyes.
… Little by little I could begin to enjoy the unprecedented colors and
plays of shapes that persisted behind my closed eyes. Kaleidoscopic,
fantastic images surged in on me, alternating, variegated, opening
and then closing themselves in circles and spirals, exploding in
colored fountains, rearranging and hybridizing themselves in
constant flux …
In the psychedelic state, vivid perceptual hallucinations are frequently
accompanied by unusual experiences of selfhood often described as ‘ego
dissolution’, where the boundaries between self and world, and other
people, appear to shift or dissolve. These departures from ‘normal’
conscious experience are so pervasive that the psychedelic state might
represent not only a change in conscious contents, but also a change in
overall conscious level. This is the idea we set out to test, in a
collaboration with Robin Carhart-Harris at Imperial College London and
Suresh Muthukumaraswamy at the University of Auckland.
In April 2016, Robin and I were at a conference in the foothills of the
Santa Catalina Mountains, just outside Tucson, in Arizona. We’d both
been invited to give talks about our research, and we were using the
opportunity to explore how our interests in consciousness might overlap
in the context of psychedelics. Scientific and medical research on LSD,
and on other psychedelic compounds like psilocybin (the active
ingredient in magic mushrooms), had only recently restarted after

decades in the wilderness. Following Hofmann’s self-experimentation
there had a been a brief flowering of studies exploring the potential of
LSD for treating a range of psychological disorders, including addiction
and alcoholism, with very promising results. But the subsequent uptake
of LSD as a recreational drug and as a symbol of rebellion, evangelised
by Timothy Leary among others, led to pretty much all of this research
being shut down by the end of the 1960s. It took until the 2000s before
any substantial new research restarted – a lost generation of scientific
progress.
At the level of neurochemistry, the classic psychedelics – LSD,
psilocybin, mescaline, and dimethyltryptamine (DMT, the active
ingredient in the South American hallucinogenic brew called ayahuasca)
– work primarily by affecting the brain’s serotonin system. Serotonin is
one of the brain’s primary neurotransmitters – chemicals which wash
through the brain’s circuits and which influence how neurons
communicate. Psychedelic drugs influence the serotonin system by
binding strongly to a specific serotonin receptor, the 5-HT2A receptor,
which is found throughout much of the brain. One of the main challenges
for psychedelic research is to understand how these low-level
pharmacological interventions alter global patterns of brain activity, so as
to deliver profound changes in conscious experience.
Robin’s team had previously discovered that the psychedelic state
involves striking alterations in brain dynamics, when compared to a
placebo control condition. Networks of brain regions that are usually coordinated in their activity – so-called ‘resting-state networks’ – become
uncoupled, and other regions that are usually more or less independent
become linked. Overall, the picture is of a breakdown in the patterns of
connectivity that characterise the brain under normal conditions. Robin’s
idea was that these breakdowns could account for signature features of
the psychedelic state, like the dissolution of boundaries between self and
world, and the intermingling of the senses.
Robin and I realised that the data he’d been collecting were ideally
suited for the algorithmic complexity analyses we’d been applying, with
my team at Sussex, to sleep and anaesthesia. In particular, some of their
brain scans had been carried out using magnetoencephalography (MEG),
which provides the high time resolution and global brain coverage that
we needed. They had used MEG to measure brain activity in volunteers

who had taken either psilocybin, LSD, or low doses of ketamine. (While
high doses of ketamine act as an anaesthetic, low doses have more of a
hallucinogenic effect.) We could use this data to answer the question:
what happens to measures of conscious level, when conscious contents
change as dramatically as they do on a psychedelic trip?
Back at Sussex, Michael Schartner and Adam Barrett calculated the
changes in the algorithmic complexity of the MEG signal across many
different regions in the brain for all three psychedelic states. The results
were clear and surprising: psilocybin, LSD, and ketamine all led to
increases when compared to a placebo control. This was the first time
anyone had seen an increase in a measure of conscious level, relative to a
baseline of waking rest. All previous comparisons, whether through sleep
or anaesthesia or disorders of consciousness, had led to decreases in these
measures.
To understand what this result means, remember that the measures of
algorithmic complexity we used are best thought of as measures of the
randomness, or ‘signal diversity’, of the brain signals that they are
applied to. A fully random sequence will have the highest possible
algorithmic complexity, the greatest possible diversity. Our findings
therefore complemented Robin’s previous studies by showing that brain
activity in the psychedelic state becomes more random over time, in line
with the freewheeling reorganisation of perceptual experience that people
frequently report during a trip. They also shed new light on how
conscious level and conscious content relate. Here is an example of a
measure of conscious level responding to the widespread changes in the
contents of consciousness that characterise the psychedelic state. The fact
that a measure of conscious level is also sensitive to changes in conscious
content makes clear that they are not independent aspects of
consciousness.
The results from our psychedelic analyses raised a disturbing
prospect. Would maximally random brain activity, as measured by
algorithmic complexity, lead to a maximally psychedelic experience? Or
to a different ‘level’ of consciousness of some other kind? The
extrapolation seems unlikely. A brain with all its neurons firing willynilly would seem more likely to give rise to no conscious experience at
all, just as free-form jazz at some point stops being music.

The issue here is that algorithmic complexity is a poor approximation
to what ‘being complex’ usually means. Intuitively, complexity is not the
same as randomness. A more satisfying notion of complexity is as the
middle ground between order and disorder – not the extreme point of
disorder. It is Nina Simone and Thelonious Monk, not the Bonzo Dog
Doo-Dah Band. ‡ What happens if we run with this more sophisticated
way of thinking about complexity instead?
—
A paper published in 1998 by Giulio Tononi and my former boss and
mentor Gerald Edelman, in the journal Science, does exactly this. I still
remember reading this paper, now some twenty years ago. It was a
landmark event in my thinking about consciousness, and a large part of
what drew me to work at the Neurosciences Institute in San Diego.
Instead of focusing, in the style of the ‘neural correlates of
consciousness’ (NCC) approach, on a single exemplary conscious
experience – like the experience of ‘seeing the colour red’ – Tononi and
Edelman asked what was characteristic about conscious experiences in
general. They made a simple but profound observation: that conscious
experiences – all conscious experiences – are both informative and
integrated. From this starting point, they made claims about the neural
basis of every conscious experience, not just of specific experiences of
seeing red, or feeling jealous, or suffering a toothache.
The idea of consciousness as simultaneously informative and
integrated needs a little unpacking.
Let’s start with information. What does it mean to say that conscious
experiences are ‘informative’? Edelman and Tononi did not mean this in
the sense that reading a newspaper can be informative, but in a sense that,
though it might at first seem trivial, conceals a great deal of richness.
Conscious experiences are informative because every conscious
experience is different from every other conscious experience that you
have ever had, ever will have, or ever could have.
Looking past the desk in front of me through the window beyond, I
have never before experienced precisely this configuration of coffee
cups, computer monitors, and clouds – an experience that is even more
distinctive when combined with all the other perceptions, emotions, and

thoughts that are simultaneously present in the background of my inner
universe. At any one time we have precisely one conscious experience
out of vastly many possible conscious experiences. Every conscious
experience therefore delivers a massive reduction of uncertainty, since
this experience is being had, and not that experience, or that experience,
and so on. And reduction of uncertainty is – mathematically – what is
meant by information.
The informativeness of a particular conscious experience is not a
function of how rich or detailed it is, or of how enlightening it is to the
person having that experience. Listening to Nina Simone while eating
strawberries on a rollercoaster rules out just as many alternative
experiences as does sitting with eyes closed in a silent room,
experiencing close to nothing. Each experience reduces uncertainty with
respect to the range of possible experiences by just the same amount.
On this view, the ‘what-it-is-like-ness’ of any specific conscious
experience is defined not so much by what it is, but by all the unrealised
but possible things that it is not. An experience of pure redness is the way
that it is, not because of any intrinsic property of ‘redness’, but because
red is not blue, green, or any other colour, or any smell, or a thought or a
feeling of regret or indeed any other form of mental content whatsoever.
Redness is redness because of all the things it isn’t, and the same goes for
all other conscious experiences.
Scoring high on information is not by itself enough. Conscious
experiences are not only highly informative, they are also integrated.
Exactly what is meant by consciousness being ‘integrated’ is still much
debated, but essentially it means that every conscious experience appears
as a unified scene. We do not experience colours separately from their
shapes, nor objects independently of their background. The many
different elements of my conscious experience right now – computers
and coffee cups, as well as the sound of a door closing in the hallway and
my thoughts about what to write next – seem tied together in an
inescapable and fundamental way, as aspects of a single encompassing
conscious scene.
The key move made by Tononi and Edelman was to propose that if
every conscious experience is both informative and unified at the level of
phenomenology, then the neural mechanisms underlying conscious
experiences should also exhibit both of these properties. That it is in

virtue of expressing both of these properties that neural mechanisms do
not merely correlate with, but actually account for, core
phenomenological features of every conscious experience.
What does it mean for a mechanism to be both integrated and
informative? Let’s abstract away from the brain for a moment and
consider a system that consists of a large number of interacting elements,
without worrying what these elements might be. As shown in the
illustration opposite, for any such system we can define a scale with two
end points. At one extreme (on the left) all the elements behave randomly
and independently, like molecules in a gas. This kind of system has
maximum information – maximum randomness – but shows no
integration at all, because every element is independent from every other.
At the other extreme (on the right), all the elements do exactly the
same thing, so that the state of each element is completely determined by
the state of the other elements in the system. No randomness at all. This
would be like the arrangement of atoms in a crystal lattice, in which the
position of any individual atom is fully determined by the lattice
structure, which is defined by the positions of all the other atoms. This
kind of arrangement has maximum integration, but almost no
information, because there are very few possible states that the system
can be in.

Fig. 2: The relation between complexity and regularity.

In the middle lie systems in which individual elements may do
different things, but in which there is some degree of co-ordination so
that the system behaves to some extent ‘as a whole’. This is the domain
where both integration and information are to be found. It is also the
middle ground between order and disorder, and it is here that systems are
typically called ‘complex’.
When we apply these descriptions to the brain, we can see how they
shed light on the neural basis of consciousness.
In a maximally information-rich brain, all neurons would behave
independently, firing randomly as if they were completely disconnected.
In such a brain, measures of algorithmic complexity, like LZW
complexity, would score very high. But this brain – with lots of
information but no integration – would not support any conscious states.
At the other extreme, a maximally ordered brain would have all neurons
doing exactly the same thing, perhaps firing in lockstep together,
somewhat like what happens during global epileptic seizures.
Algorithmic complexity here would be very low. This brain would also
lack consciousness, but for a different reason: lots of integration, no
information.

A fit-for-purpose measure of conscious level should therefore track
not information itself, but rather how information and integration are
jointly expressed. Such a measure – a measure of complexity in the true
sense – would exemplify the real problem approach to consciousness by
explicitly linking properties of mechanism to properties of experience.
As we’ve seen, approximations to algorithmic complexity, like LZW
complexity, don’t do a good job of this. They tell us a lot about
information but nothing at all about integration. The PCI fares a little
better. To score high on the PCI scale, the pulse of energy injected by
TMS has to generate a pattern of brain activity that is difficult to
compress, indicating high information. The pulse also has to travel far
and wide across the cortex in order to generate an ‘echo’ – the
compressibility of which can then be assessed. However, although this
cortical spread is suggestive of integration, it still falls short of what we
might ideally require from such a measure. The PCI measure depends on
brain activity being integrated in a rather vague way – otherwise there
would be no echo – but it doesn’t measure integration in the same
quantitative fashion by which information is measured. What we are
looking for are measures that are directly sensitive to both integration and
information, from the same data, in the same way, and at the same time.
There are several measures that do fulfil these criteria, at least in
theory. Back in the 1990s, Tononi and Edelman, together with their
colleague Olaf Sporns, came up with a measure they called ‘neural
complexity’, and ten years later I derived my own measure, which I
called ‘causal density’, using a different kind of mathematics. A number
of newer measures, some of which we’ll meet in the next chapter, have
built on these foundations in increasingly sophisticated ways. All these
measures attempt to quantify, in one way or another, the extent to which a
system occupies the middle ground between order and disorder, where
integrated information is to be found. The problem, however, is that none
has yet worked particularly well when applied to actual brain imaging
data.
There is something curious about this state of affairs. One might
reasonably expect measures that adhere more closely to theoretical
principles to perform better in practice than measures like algorithmic
complexity, which are only weakly tied to the underlying theory. But this
is not what we see, so what is going on? One possibility is that the theory

itself is misguided. However, my intuition is that we simply need to do
more work in refining the mathematics so that the measures do what we
would like them to do, as well as in developing improved brain imaging
methods to deliver the right kind of data for them to work on.
—
The search for a true consciousness meter therefore goes on. It is worth
emphasising that progress so far has been considerable. It’s now widely
recognised that conscious level is not the same thing as wakefulness, and
we already have a number of brain-based measures of conscious level
that perform impressively in tracking different global states of
consciousness, and in detecting residual awareness in brain-injured
patients. Massimini’s PCI has been particularly significant. It is both
clinically useful and based firmly on sound theoretical principles of
information and integration, so that it effectively bridges neural
mechanisms and universal properties of conscious experience – ‘real
problem’ style. Other measures, based on different but related principles,
are emerging all the time, and easy-to-use approximations, like
estimating the algorithmic complexity of spontaneous brain data, are
revealing fascinating connections between conscious level and conscious
content.
Yet a fundamental question still remains. Is consciousness more like
temperature – reducible to and identifiable with a basic property of the
physical (or informational) universe? Or is it more like life, a
constellation of many different properties, each with its own explanation
in terms of underlying mechanisms? The approaches to measuring
consciousness we’ve met up to now take their cue from the temperature
story, but my intuition is that in the end they may fit better with the
analogy from life. For me, ‘integration’ and ‘information’ are general
properties of most – perhaps all – conscious experiences. But this doesn’t
mean that consciousness is integrated information, in the same way that
temperature is mean molecular kinetic energy.
To see what drives this intuition, we need to push the analogy between
consciousness and temperature as far as it can go, to see whether and
when it breaks down. It’s time to meet the ‘integrated information theory’
of consciousness.

Notes
Joachim Dalencé: www.encyclopedia.com/science/dictionaries-thesauruses-pictures-and-pressreleases/dalence-joachim.
Inventing Temperature: H. Chang (2004).
Could the same approach work: Possibly the first person to ask, and answer, this question was
Thomas Henry Huxley (‘Darwin’s Bulldog’). In an 1870 lecture he said ‘I believe that we
shall, sooner or later, arrive at a mechanical equivalent of consciousness, just as we have
arrived at a mechanical equivalent of heat’. Quoted in Cobb (2020), p. 113.
potential to transform scientific understanding: Seth et al. (2008).
more than four million: Weiser et al. (2008).
‘bispectral index’ monitor: Myles et al. (2004).
remained controversial: Nasraway et al. (2002).
four times as many neurons: Herculano-Houzel (2009).
no reason to doubt: See Lemon & Edgley (2010). The cerebellum often shows up as an ‘area of
interest’ in neuroimaging studies. Often these findings are not discussed because the
cerebellum wasn’t the focus of the experiment, so researchers don’t know what to say about it.
differences in the brain’s energy consumption: DiNuzzo & Nedergaard (2017).
complexity of these patterns: Ferrarelli et al. (2010); Massimini et al. (2005).
compressed representation: To create a compressed representation of a sequence of all 1s (or all
0s), for a sequence of length n, all you need to do is specify the initial 1 (or 0) and then specify
n repetitions. At the other extreme, an entirely random sequence cannot be compressed at all:
you have to specify every single 1 and 0 in its proper place in order to accurately regenerate it.
Sequences that contain some amount of predictable structure will have compressed
representations somewhere in the middle. The length of the optimally compressed
representation is called the Kolmogorov-Chaitin-Solomonoff complexity. LZW complexity
approximates and provides an upper bound on this quantity.
landmark study: Casali et al. (2013).
series of studies: Schartner et al. (2017b); Schartner et al. (2015). We made sure, in these studies,
that changes in LZW complexity were not trivial reflections of other – better known – changes
in EEG brain signals that accompany loss of consciousness, like increases in the power of lowfrequency ‘delta’ waves, which is known to happen during sleep.
same pattern of results: Casarotto et al. (2016).
clinical approaches: See for example the widely used Glasgow coma scale (Teasdale & Murray,
2000).
This rare affliction: Locked-in syndrome is most often caused by damage to the pons – a part of
the brainstem which contains important neuronal pathways linking the spinal cord with other
parts of the brain.
wrote an entire book: Bauby (1997). You might think that being locked-in is a fate worse than
death, but while some people in this condition do find life intolerable, a surprising proportion
report a reasonable quality of life (Rousseau et al., 2015). This underscores the dangers of
assuming how things are on the inside from how they appear on the outside.
a strange case: The story is also related here: www.humanbrainproject.eu/en/followhbp/news/measures-of-consciousness-and-a-tale-of-cultural-loss.
Owen concluded: Owen et al. (2006). Adrian Owen recounts the story of his team’s discovery, and
its implications for medicine and consciousness research, in his book Into the Grey Zone
(Owen, 2017).

laborious way of communicating: Monti et al. (2010). Given that patients can only answer ‘yes’ or
‘no’ in this set-up, researchers have to be very careful when selecting their questions. Asking
whether someone is in pain is reasonable, but what about asking whether they want to remain
alive? There are many ethical quandaries hereabouts. In 2016, the writer Linda Marshall
Griffiths, the producer Nadia Molinari, and I created an audio drama, The Sky Is Wider, which
explores these issues. https://www.lindamarshallgriffiths.co.uk/the-sky-is-wider-best-singledrama.
a recent analysis: Naci et al. (2017).
may be limited: A better-known example of this problem has been the attempt to define and
measure intelligence with respect to a single scale, such as ‘IQ’. This project has always
floundered in the face of the sheer variety of intelligent behaviour seen across individuals,
cultures, and species. See Bayne et al. (2016) for a multidimensional approach to
characterising conscious level.
communicate with people during lucid dreams: See Konkoly et al. (2021).
Little by little: Albert Hofmann, ‘LSD – My Problem Child’, http://psychedeliclibrary.org/child1.htm.
a lost generation: See Michael Pollan’s How to Change Your Mind for much more on this history
(Pollan, 2018).
striking alterations in brain dynamics: Carhart-Harris et al. (2012).
high time resolution: MEG and EEG data typically have very high time resolution, on the order of
milliseconds, since they directly reflect the electrical activity of populations of neurons. FMRI
is very slow by comparison, with a natural timescale of seconds. This is partly because of the
slow operation of a typical MRI scanner, typically allowing one measurement every one or
two seconds, and partly because of the slow timescale of the blood oxygenation signal that
fMRI measures.
results were clear: Schartner et al. (2017a). Another, more recent study found the same pattern of
results with DMT (Timmermann et al., 2019).
Our findings: In a follow-up study, led by Lionel Barnett, we found that the psychedelic state
involves significant reductions in ‘information flow’ between regions of the cortex. This again
speaks to a loss of perceptual structure in the psychedelic state. See Barnett et al. (2020).
A paper published in 1998: Tononi & Edelman (1998). Edelman died in 2014 – I wrote one of
many obituaries paying tribute to this hugely influential scientist (Seth, 2014a).
seem tied together: Some philosophers have questioned the assumption that conscious
experiences are necessarily unified (Bayne, 2010). One scenario where the possibility of nonunified consciousness is often raised is in split-brain patients, who have had their cortical
hemispheres surgically separated. More on this in chapter 3.
neural complexity: Tononi et al. (1994).
causal density: Seth et al. (2011a); Seth et al. (2006).
refining the mathematics: For a comparison of measures of complexity in the context of
neuroscience, see Seth et al. (2011a) and Mediano et al. (2019).
Other measures: Demertzi et al. (2019); Luppi et al. (2019).
*

Imagining (and executing) fluent movements activates cortical regions such as the
supplementary motor area, while imagining spatial navigation lights up other regions,
such as the parahippocampal gyrus. Anatomically, these brain areas are quite distant from
each other. Unsurprisingly, both imagery tasks activate regions involved in hearing and in
language processing.

†

‡

Reflective insight is preserved in the rare ‘lucid dreaming’ state, in which dreamers are
aware that they are dreaming and can voluntarily direct their behaviour. In a remarkable
recent study, researchers were able to communicate with people during lucid dreams by
using their eye movements as a channel, much like the locked-in patients described
earlier. These dreamers were able to correctly answer simple math problems and various
yes/no questions.
On their 1967 debut album Gorilla, the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band parodied traditional
jazz music by attempting to play as badly as possible. There’ll be more about gorillas
later in this book.

3
Phi
It’s July 2006 and I’m in Las Vegas, eating gelato with Giulio Tononi.
We’re at the Venetian hotel, and I have almost no idea what’s going on.
I’d flown in the day before from London, and deep inside the Venetian
it’s always early evening, the fake stars just beginning to glimmer against
the fake azure sky, the fake gondolas drifting past the fake palazzos. They
keep it that way so that people stay there spending their money, in a
permanent state of aperitivo, unaware how much time has passed. I’m
jet-lagged, slightly drunk – we’ve moved on here after a long dinner –
and for several hours now we’ve been debating the details of the hugely
ambitious ‘integrated information theory’ of consciousness – or IIT. This
is Tononi’s brainchild, and more so than any other neuroscientifically
motivated theory, it tackles the hard problem of consciousness head on.
IIT says that subjective experience is a property of patterns of cause and
effect, that information is as real as mass or energy, and that even atoms
may be a little bit conscious.
It’s not an even-handed discussion. I spend much of the time
defending a recent paper of mine that criticises an early version of his
theory. Giulio is gently but persistently trying to explain why I’m wrong.
I’m not sure whether it’s the jet lag, the wine, or Giulio’s relentless logic,
but I am less sure of myself than I’d been on the flight over. The next
morning, I resolve to think harder, to understand more, to prepare better,
and to drink less.
I found IIT fascinating then, and continue to find it fascinating now,
because it exemplifies the analogy between consciousness and
temperature. According to IIT consciousness simply is integrated
information. In making this case, the theory upends deeply held intuitions
about how mind and matter relate, and about how consciousness is
woven into the fabric of the universe.
Back in 2006, IIT was not well known. Today, it’s one of the highestprofile but also most hotly debated theories in consciousness science. It’s

been eulogised by some of the biggest names in the field, besides Tononi
himself. Christof Koch, former champion of the NCC approach, called it
‘a gigantic step in the final resolution of the ancient mind-body problem’.
But its ambition and prominence have also provoked considerable
pushback. One reason for this pushback is that its approach is deeply
mathematical and unapologetically complex. Of course, this is not
necessarily a bad thing: nobody said that solving consciousness should be
simple. Another objection is that the claims it makes are so
counterintuitive that the theory must be wrong. This, too, is a dangerous
intuition to rely on when faced with a phenomenon as perplexing as
consciousness.
For me, the bigger problem is that IIT’s extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence, yet it is precisely the ambition of IIT – to solve
the hard problem – that renders its most distinctive claims untestable in
practice. The extraordinary evidence that is needed cannot be obtained.
Fortunately, not all is lost. As I will explain, some predictions of IIT may
be testable, at least in principle. And there are alternative interpretations
of IIT, more closely aligned with the real problem than with the hard
problem, which are driving the development of new measures of
conscious level that are both theoretically principled and practically
applicable.
—
As its name gives away, the concepts of ‘information’ and ‘integration’
are at the heart of IIT. The theory builds on ideas about measuring
conscious level that we encountered in the previous chapter, but it does
so in truly distinctive ways.
At the core of IIT is a single measure called ‘Φ’ (the Greek letter phi,
pronounced fy). The easiest way to think about Φ is that it measures how
much a system is ‘more than the sum’ of its parts, in terms of
information. How can a system be more than the sum of its parts? A
flock of birds provides a loose analogy: the flock seems to be more than
the sum of the birds that make it up – it seems to have a ‘life of its own’.
IIT takes this idea and translates it into the domain of information. In IIT,
Φ measures the amount of information a system generates ‘as a whole’,
over and above the amount of information generated by its parts

independently. This underpins the main claim of the theory, which is that
a system is conscious to the extent that its whole generates more
information than its parts.
Notice that this is not merely a claim about a correlation, nor is it a
real problem-style proposal about how mechanistic properties of a system
account for properties of phenomenology. It is a claim about identity.
According to IIT, the level of Φ is intrinsic to a system (meaning that it
does not depend on an external observer), and it is identical to the
amount of consciousness associated with that system. High Φ, lots of
consciousness. Zero Φ, no consciousness. This is why IIT is the ultimate
expression of a temperature-based view of consciousness.
What does it take to have high Φ? Although the core idea should be
familiar from the previous chapter, there are some important differences,
so it’s worth taking it from the top.
Imagine a network of simplified artificial ‘neurons’, each of which
can be ‘on’ or ‘off’. To have high Φ, the network has to satisfy two main
conditions. First, the global state of the network – the network ‘as a
whole’ – has to rule out a large number of alternative possible global
states. This is information, and it reflects the observation from
phenomenology that every conscious experience rules out a great many
alternative possible conscious experiences. Second, there must be more
information when considering the system as a whole than when dividing
it into its parts (its individual neurons, or groups of neurons) and
considering all the parts separately. This is integration, and it reflects the
observation that all conscious experiences are unified, that they are
experienced ‘all of a piece’. Φ is a way of putting a number to a system
that measures how high it scores on both these dimensions.
There are many ways a system can fail to have high Φ. One is to score
low on information. A minimal example is a single photodiode – a simple
light sensor which can be either ‘on’ or ‘off’. This has low or zero Φ
because its state at any time carries very little information about
anything. Whatever state it is in (one or zero, on or off) only ever rules
out one alternative (zero or one). A single photodiode conveys at most
one ‘bit’ of information.*
Another way a system can have low Φ is to score low on integration.
Imagine a large array of photodiodes, perhaps like the sensor in your
phone’s camera. The global state of the system is the state of the entire

array, and this can carry a great deal of information. A sufficiently large
sensor array will enter a different global state for every different state of
the world it encounters, which is why cameras are useful. But this global
information does not matter to the sensor itself. The individual
photodiodes in the sensor are all causally independent from one another –
their state depends only on the level of light they each encounter. Chop
the sensor into a bunch of (causally independent) photodiodes and it will
work just as well. The information conveyed by the sensor array as a
whole is not more than that conveyed by all the sensors, all the
photodiodes, independently. This means that the information it generates
is no more than the sum of its parts and so its Φ will also be zero.
Another instructive zero Φ example is a so-called ‘split brain’
situation. Imagine a network divided into two completely separate halves.
Each half of this network may have a non-zero Φ, but the network as a
whole will have zero Φ. This is because there is a way of dividing the
network into parts – the two halves – for which the whole is no more than
the sum of the parts. This example emphasises how Φ depends on the
optimal way in which a system can be ‘cut up’ to minimise the difference
between what the whole does and what the parts do. This is one of the
distinctive aspects of IIT which sets it apart from the measures of
complexity described in the previous chapter.
This example also implies that a real split brain – following surgery to
divide the cortical hemispheres, as happens in some cases of otherwise
untreatable epilepsy – might harbour two independent ‘consciousnesses’,
but that there will be no single conscious entity spanning both
hemispheres. In the same way, you and I are both conscious, but there is
no collective conscious entity spanning the two of us, because we can be
informationally split right down the middle.
Sticking with real brains for a moment, IIT accounts neatly for a
number of observations about conscious level. Remember from the
previous chapter that the cerebellum doesn’t seem much involved in
consciousness, despite containing about three quarters of all neurons in
the brain. This is explained by IIT because the anatomy of the cerebellum
is comparable to the sensor array in your camera – a vast number of Φunfriendly semi-independent circuits. The cerebral cortex, by contrast, is
packed with densely interconnected wiring that is likely to be associated
with high Φ. So then why does consciousness fade during dreamless

sleep, anaesthesia, and coma, given that this wiring doesn’t change? IIT
says that, in these states, the ability of cortical neurons to interact with
other is compromised in ways such that Φ vanishes.
IIT is an ‘axiomatic’ approach to consciousness. It starts with
theoretical principles rather than with experimental data. Axioms, in
logic, are statements that are self-evidently true, in the sense that they are
generally agreed to require no additional justification. ‘Two shapes that
fill exactly the same space are the same shape’ – from the Greek
philosopher Euclid – is a good example. IIT proposes axioms about
consciousness – primarily that conscious experiences are both integrated
and informative – and uses these axioms to support claims about what
properties the mechanisms that underlie these experiences must have. On
IIT, any mechanism that has these properties, whether a brain or not,
whether biological or not, will have non-zero Φ, and will have
consciousness.
—
So much for principles. Like any theory, IIT will stand or fall on whether
its predictions are testable. The primary claim of the theory is that the
level of consciousness for a system is given by its Φ. Testing this requires
measuring Φ for real systems, and this is where the trouble starts. It turns
out that measuring Φ is extremely challenging and in most cases nearly
or actually impossible. The main reason for this is that IIT treats
‘information’ in an unusual way.
The standard use of information in mathematics, developed by Claude
Shannon in the 1950s, is observer-relative. Observer-relative (or
extrinsic) information is the degree to which uncertainty is reduced, from
the perspective of an observer, by observing a system in a particular state.
For example, imagine rolling a single die many times. Each time, you
observe one outcome out of six possibilities: each time, five alternatives
are ruled out. This corresponds to a reduction in uncertainty of a
particular amount (measured in bits), and is information that is ‘for’ the
observer.
To measure observer-relative information, it’s usually sufficient to
observe how a system behaves, over some period of time. With dice, you
can just write down what you get each time you make a new throw, and

this will allow you to calculate how much information is generated by
throwing any particular number. If the system is a network of neurons,
it’s enough to record the activity of the neurons over time. An external
observer can record all the different states the neurons enter into,
calculate the probabilities associated with each state, and then measure
the reduction in uncertainty associated with the network being in any one
of these states.
For IIT, however, information cannot be treated in this observerrelative way. This is because on IIT information – integrated
information, Φ – actually is consciousness, and so if we treat information
as observer-relative then this would mean that consciousness is also
observer-relative. But it isn’t observer-relative. Whether I am conscious
or not should not and does not depend on how you or anyone else
measures my brain.
Information in IIT must therefore be treated as intrinsic to a system,
not as relative to an external observer. It must be defined in a way that
does not depend on any external observer. It must be information ‘for’
the system itself – not for anyone or anything else. If not, the identity
relation between Φ and consciousness at the core of IIT cannot hold.
In order to measure intrinsic information, it is not enough merely to
observe how the system behaves over time. You – as the scientist, the
external observer – have to know all the different ways a system could
behave, even if it never actually behaves in all these ways. The
distinction is between knowing what a system actually does over time
(which is easy, at least in principle, and is observer-relative) and knowing
what a system could do even if it never does it (which is usually difficult,
if not impossible, but is observer-independent).
In the language of information theory, the difference between these
situations is the difference between the ‘empirical’ distribution of the
states of a system and its ‘maximum entropy’ distribution (the latter has
its name because it reflects the maximum level of uncertainty about a
system). Imagine rolling two dice several times. Perhaps you throw a
seven, an eight, and an eleven, and a few other numbers, but never a
twelve. In this situation, the empirical distribution would not contain a
twelve, but the maximum entropy distribution would, because a twelve
could have happened, even though in this particular sequence of throws it
didn’t. This means that any particular outcome – whether it was a seven,

eight, or eleven – would generate more information (reduce more
uncertainty, rule out more alternatives) with respect to the maximum
entropy distribution (which includes twelve), than with respect to the
empirical distribution (which doesn’t).
Compared to measuring the empirical distribution of a system by just
observing it over time, measuring the maximum entropy distribution is in
general a very difficult thing to do. There are two ways one might go
about it. The first is to perturb the system in all possible ways and see
what happens, just as a child might push all the buttons on a new toy to
see all the things it can do. The second is to infer the maximum entropy
distribution from an exhaustive, complete knowledge of the system’s
physical mechanism – its ‘cause–effect structure’. If you know
everything about a mechanism, it is sometimes possible to know all the
things it could do, even if in practice it doesn’t do them. If I know that a
die has six sides, I can figure out that two dice can generate all the
numbers from two to twelve without having to make a single throw.
Unfortunately, often all we have access to are the dynamics of a
system, to what a system does, rather than to what it could do. This is
certainly true for brains. I can record what your brain does, at varying
levels of detail, but I have no way of knowing its complete physical
structure, nor can I perturb its activity in all possible ways. For these
reasons, the most distinctive claim of IIT – that Φ actually is
consciousness – is also the least testable.
—
There are other challenges faced by attempts to measure Φ, whichever
flavour of information you choose. One is that measuring any Φ requires
finding the appropriate way of dividing up the system, so as to best
compare the ‘whole’ with the ‘parts’. For some systems – like split brains
– it’s pretty easy (split it down the middle), but in general this is a very
difficult problem, since the number of possible ways of dividing up a
system grows exponentially with its size.
Then there are even more fundamental questions about what counts as
a system in the first place. What is the right granularity of space and time
over which to calculate Φ? Is it neurons and milliseconds, or atoms and
femtoseconds? Could an entire country be conscious – and would one

country be more conscious than another? Could we even consider the
interactions of tectonic plates over geological timescales as integrating
information on a planetary scale?
It’s important to recognise that these challenges – including that of
measuring intrinsic information, rather than observer-relative, extrinsic
information – are only problems for us as scientists, as external
observers, trying to calculate Φ. According to IIT, any particular system
would just have a Φ. It would go about its business integrating
information in just the same way that when you throw a stone, it traces an
arc through the sky without needing to calculate its trajectory according
to the laws of gravity. Just because a theory is difficult to test doesn’t
mean it’s wrong. It just means it’s difficult to test.
—
Let’s set aside the challenge of measuring Φ and ask what is implied by
IIT, if the theory is right. It turns out that following IIT all the way
through leads to some very weird consequences.
Imagine I open up your skull and glom onto your brain a fistful of
new neurons, each of which wires up to your existing grey matter in
some specific way. Imagine further that, as you go about your day, these
new neurons never actually do anything at all. No matter what happens,
no matter what you do or who you see, they never fire. Your newly
augmented brain appears, to all intents and purposes, just the same as the
old one. But, here’s the thing, your new neurons are organised in such a
way that they could fire if only the rest of your brain encountered some
particular state which it never in fact encounters.
For example, let’s say these new neurons would only ever fire if you
were to eat a Densuke watermelon, a rare fruit found only on the
Japanese island of Hokkaido. Assuming that you never actually eat a
Densuke, so that these new neurons never fire, IIT nevertheless predicts
that all your conscious experiences would change – albeit very subtly.
This is because there are now more potential states your brain could be in
– the new neurons could potentially fire – so Φ must change too.
The flipside of this scenario leads to an equally strange prediction.
Imagine a bunch of neurons sitting quietly deep inside your visual cortex.
Despite being wired up to other neurons – and therefore potentially able

to fire, given the right inputs – these neurons are doing nothing. Then,
through some clever experimental intervention, they are actively
prevented from firing – they become inactivated rather than merely
inactive. Even though the overall activity of the brain has not changed at
all, IIT would again predict a change in conscious experience, since there
are now fewer potential states the brain could enter into.
Remarkably, a version of this experiment may soon be possible,
thanks to the new technology of optogenetics, which allows researchers
to control the activity of precisely targeted neurons with exquisite detail.
Optogenetics uses genetic techniques to modify specific neurons so that
they become sensitive to light at specific wavelengths. Then, by using
lasers or LED arrays to shine light into the brains of genetically modified
animals, these neurons can be switched on or switched off. In principle,
optogenetics could be used to inactivate already inactive neurons, with
the effects on conscious perception – if any – being assessed. This is not
a simple experiment, and it does not provide a way of measuring Φ. But
the prospect of testing any aspect of IIT is exciting, and I’ve been lucky
to be involved in recent discussions – with Giulio Tononi and others –
with a view to actually getting it done.
Zooming out, another weirdness of IIT is that by making the strong
claim that Φ is consciousness, IIT also implies that information itself
exists – that it has some definite ontological status in our universe – a
status like mass/energy and electrical charge. (Ontology is the study of
‘what exists’.) In some sense, this aligns with the so-called ‘it from bit’
view of the physicist John Wheeler, probably the best-known advocate of
the idea that everything that exists ultimately derives from information –
that information is primary, and that everything else follows from it.
And this leads to a final challenging implication: panpsychism. So
long as there is the right kind of mechanism, the right kind of cause–
effect structure in a system, there will be non-zero Φ, and there will be
consciousness. IIT’s panpsychism is a restrained panpsychism, not the
sort in which consciousness is spread out through the entire universe like
a thin layer of jam. Rather, consciousness is to be found wherever
integrated information – Φ – is to be found. This could be here and there,
but not everywhere.
—

IIT is original, ambitious, and intellectually exuberant. It remains the
only neuroscientific theory out there that makes a serious attempt on the
hard problem of consciousness. IIT is also most definitely weird, but the
fact that something is weird doesn’t mean it’s wrong. Almost everything
about modern physics is both weird and less wrong than the physics of
the past. But the success of those parts of modern physics that are now
established as being less wrong has everything to do with their being
experimentally testable. And this is the trouble with IIT. With its audacity
comes the heavy price that its primary claim – the equivalence between
Φ and conscious level – may be impossible to test.
For my money, the best way forward is to retain the fundamental
insight of IIT that conscious experiences are both informative and
integrated, but to relinquish the conceit that Φ is to consciousness as
mean molecular kinetic energy is to temperature. This realigns IIT’s
insights about the structure of conscious experiences with the perspective
of the real problem. Adopting this view opens the way to developing
alternative, practically applicable versions of Φ, measures which end up
having a lot in common with the measures of complexity that we met at
the end of the previous chapter.
My colleagues Adam Barrett and Pedro Mediano and I have been
following this strategy for many years now. We’ve developed several
versions of Φ that work with observer-relative information, rather than
with intrinsic information. This allows us to measure Φ based on the
observable behaviour of a system over time, without worrying about
what it could do but never does. As things currently stand, our various
versions of Φ all behave rather differently, even on very simple model
systems. This means there is still more to do in developing versions of Φ
that work in practice, and that – we hope – gain their empirical grip
because of, and not in spite of, their basis in theoretical principles. From
our perspective, this means treating ‘integration’ and ‘information’ as
general properties of conscious experiences to be explained, not as
axiomatic claims about what consciousness actually ‘is’. In other words,
treating consciousness as being more like life than like temperature.
—

Our journey through levels of consciousness has taken us from the
oblivion of anaesthesia and coma, past the hinterlands of the vegetative
and minimally conscious states, through the disconnected worlds of sleep
and dreaming, out into the sunlight of full wakeful awareness, and even
further afield, towards the strange hyperreality of psychedelia. Linking
these levels is the idea that every conscious experience is both
informative and integrated, inhabiting the complex middle ground
between order and disorder. This core idea has given rise to new
measures, such as the PCI, which are both practically useful and capable
of building explanatory bridges, real problem-style, between the physical
and the phenomenal. With IIT we’ve reached one of the most exciting
and controversial frontiers of consciousness science, where audacity
meets the limits of testability and where the analogy between
consciousness and temperature may finally break down. And even
though I’m sceptical about the larger claims of this provocative theory, I
am just as keen now to see how it develops as I was all those years ago,
eating gelato with Giulio Tononi.
Looking back, Las Vegas was exactly the right place to debate IIT. Is
information real? Is consciousness everywhere? In Las Vegas it’s hard to
believe anything is real, besides the raw feel of experience itself. Even
now, years later, I can imagine myself back in the perpetual early evening
of the Venetian, the fake gondolas tracing out their clockwork patterns. I
am certainly conscious, but what am I conscious of? In the Venetian, it’s
tempting to think that everything is a kind of hallucination.
As we’re about to see, there’s some unexpected truth to this peculiar
thought.
Notes
IIT says: Some of the main papers on IIT from Tononi’s group are: Tononi (2008); Tononi (2012);
Tononi et al. (2016). For an accessible manifesto, see Koch (2019).
recent paper of mine: Seth et al. (2006).
a gigantic step: www.scientificamerican.com/article/is-consciousness-universal.
dangerous intuition: See for example Scott Aaronson’s critiques: www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?
p=1799.
main claim of the theory: Φ can also be thought of as a way to measure the property of
‘emergence’. Emergence is a very general concept referring to how macroscopic properties
(such as a flock) arise from or relate to their microscopic components (the individual birds).
See Hoel et al. (2013); Rosas et al. (2020); Seth (2010).

ultimate expression of a temperature-based view: Tononi and Koch use this analogy themselves
(Tononi & Koch, 2015).
ways a system can fail: These are adapted from Tononi (2008).
work just as well: This is to a first approximation, setting aside things like contrast adjustment
which might operate across the whole array.
surgery to divide: Split-brain operations involve severing the massive bundle of nerve fibres that
interconnect the cortical hemispheres, the corpus callosum. The surgery can be successful in
alleviating severe epilepsy, but is rarely performed now that other, less invasive treatment
options are increasingly available. Split-brain patients retain some degree of connectivity
between the hemispheres, but for the purposes of this example let’s imagine their entire brain
is cut in half. See de Haan et al. (2020).
IIT accounts neatly: Tononi et al. (2016).
IIT proposes axioms: Besides the axioms of integration and information, IIT proposes three
others: that consciousness exists, that it is composed of many elements, and that it is exclusive
to a particular spatiotemporal scale (Tononi et al., 2016). The philosopher Tim Bayne has
critiqued IIT on the basis that its proposed axioms, particularly the final one regarding
‘exclusion’, may not in fact be self-evidently true (Bayne, 2018).
measure the reduction in uncertainty: In information theory, information – reduction of
uncertainty – is measured using a quantity called entropy. Entropy (usually termed S) is a
function of the number of distinct states a system can be in, together with the probability of
being in each of these states. It is given by the equation S = – Σ pk log(pk). In words, this
means that for each state (k) of a system you multiply the probability of being in that state by
the logarithm of that probability, then sum these values over all states. For any given system,
entropy is highest when each state is equally probable. A fair die has an entropy of about 2.5
bits (when the logarithm is taken in base 2). A loaded die will have a lower entropy.
know everything about a mechanism: The value of Φ a system has is therefore more a claim about
its mechanism (how it is wired up) than about its dynamics (what it does). Indeed, recent
versions of IIT describe Φ in terms of ‘irreducible cause–effect power’, which is a claim about
mechanism, not dynamics (Tononi et al., 2016).
dividing up the system: Technically, this division is called the minimum information partition.
There are also tricky issues about how best to deal with partitions of different sizes, since a
larger partition will, by virtue of having more elements, be capable of generating more
information.
Could an entire country: According to IIT a ‘conscious country’ might occur if Φ is maximised
on a spatiotemporal scale that operates across an entire country, perhaps with individual people
being analogous to neurons in a brain. Such a situation would have the peculiar implication
that, once a country is conscious, its individual elements – the people – would no longer be
individually conscious. This bizarre scenario has been explored by the American philosopher
Eric Schwitzgebel: schwitzsplinters.blogspot.com/2012/03/why-tononi-should-think-thatunited.html.
shine light into the brains: Deisseroth (2015).
actually getting it done: See www.templetonworldcharity.org/accelerating-researchconsciousness-our-structured-adversarial-collaboration-projects. The ‘inactive’ versus
‘inactivated’ experiment was proposed by Umberto Olcese and Giulio Tononi.
‘it from bit’ view: Wheeler (1989).
our various versions: Barrett & Seth (2011); Mediano et al. (2019). Mathematically, our measures
work with the empirical distribution of a system, rather than with its maximum entropy
distribution.

how it develops: One intriguing proposal is that the pervasive ‘spatiality’ of visual experience is
explained by the gridlike anatomy found in lower levels of the visual cortex (Haun & Tononi,
2019).
*

In information theory, the ‘bit’ is the fundamental unit of information.

II
CONTENT

4
Perceiving from the Inside Out
I open my eyes and a world appears. I’m sitting on the deck of a
tumbledown wooden house, high in a cypress forest a few miles north of
Santa Cruz, California. It’s early morning. Looking straight out, I can see
tall trees still wreathed in the cool ocean fog that rolls in every night,
sending the temperature plummeting. I can’t see the ground, so the deck
and the trees all seem to be floating together with me in the mist. There
are some old plastic chairs – I’m sitting on one – a table, and a tray
arranged with coffee and bread. I can hear birdsong, some rustling
around in the back – the people I’m staying with – and a distant murmur
from something I can’t identify. Not every morning is like this; this is a
good morning. I try to persuade myself, not for the first time, that this
extraordinary world is a construction of my brain, a kind of ‘controlled
hallucination’.
Whenever we are conscious, we are conscious of something, or of
many things. These are the contents of consciousness. To understand how
they come about, and what I mean by controlled hallucination, let’s
change our perspective. Imagine, for a moment, that you are a brain.
Really try to think about what it’s like up there, sealed inside the bony
vault of the skull, trying to figure out what’s out there in the world.
There’s no light, no sound, no anything – it’s completely dark and utterly
silent. When trying to form perceptions, all the brain has to go on is a
constant barrage of electrical signals which are only indirectly related to
things out there in the world, whatever they may be. These sensory inputs
don’t come with labels attached (‘I’m from a cup of coffee’, ‘I’m from a
tree’). They don’t even arrive with labels announcing their modality –
whether they are visual, auditory, sensations of touch, or from less
familiar modalities such as thermoception (sense of temperature) or
proprioception (sense of body position).*
How does the brain transform these inherently ambiguous sensory
signals into a coherent perceptual world full of objects, people, and

places? In Part Two of this book, we explore the idea that the brain is a
‘prediction machine’, and that what we see, hear, and feel is nothing
more than the brain’s ‘best guess’ of the causes of its sensory inputs.
Following this idea all the way through, we will see that the contents of
consciousness are a kind of waking dream – a controlled hallucination –
that is both more than and less than whatever the real world really is.
—
Here’s a commonsense view of perception. Let’s call it the ‘how things
seem’ view.
There’s a mind-independent reality out there, full of objects and
people and places that actually have properties like colour, shape, texture,
and so on. Our senses act as transparent windows onto this world,
detecting these objects and their features and conveying this information
to the brain, whereupon complex neuronal processes read it out to form
perceptions. A coffee cup out there in the world leads to a perception of a
coffee cup generated within the brain. As to who or what is doing the
perceiving – well, that’s the ‘self’, isn’t it, the ‘I behind the eyes’ one
might say, the recipient of wave upon wave of sensory data, which uses
its perceptual readouts to guide behaviour, to decide what to do next.
There’s a cup of coffee over there. I perceive it and I pick it up. I sense, I
think, and then I act.
This is an appealing picture. Patterns of thinking established over
decades, maybe centuries, have accustomed us to the idea that the brain
is some kind of computer perched inside the skull, processing sensory
information to build an inner picture of the outside world for the benefit
of the self. This picture is so familiar that it can be difficult to conceive of
any reasonable alternative. Indeed, many neuroscientists and
psychologists still think about perception in this way, as a process of
‘bottom-up’ feature detection.
Here’s how the bottom-up picture is supposed to work. Stimuli from
the world – light waves, sound waves, molecules conveying tastes and
smells, and so on – impinge on sensory organs and cause electrical
impulses to flow ‘upwards’ or ‘inwards’ into the brain. These sensory
signals pass through several distinct processing stages, shown by the
black arrows in the image below, with each stage analysing out

increasingly complex features. Let’s take vision as an example. Early
stages might respond to features like luminance or edges, and later,
deeper stages to object parts – such as eyes and ears, or wheels and wing
mirrors. Still later stages would respond to whole objects, or object
categories, like faces, cars and coffee cups.

Fig. 3: Perception as bottom-up feature detection.

In this way, the external world with its objects and people and allsorts-of-everything becomes recapitulated in a series of features extracted
from the river of sensory data flowing into the brain, like fishermen
catching fish of increasing size and complexity the further along the river
they are. Signals flowing in the opposite direction – from the ‘top down’
or the ‘inside out’, the small grey arrows – serve only to refine or
otherwise constrain the all-important bottom-up flow of sensory
information.
This bottom-up view of perception fits well with what we know about
the anatomy of the brain, at least at first glance. In the cortex, different
perceptual modalities are associated with specific regions: visual cortex,
auditory cortex, and so on. Within each region, perceptual processing is
organised hierarchically. In the visual system, lower levels such as the
primary visual cortex are close to sensory inputs, while higher levels,
such as the inferotemporal cortex, are several stages of processing further
away. In terms of connectivity, signals from each level are pooled
together in the level above, so that neurons in higher levels can respond

to features that may be spread out over space or time – just as one would
expect.
Studies of brain activity also seem friendly to the bottom-up view.
Experiments going back decades – investigating the visual systems of
cats and monkeys – have repeatedly shown that neurons at early (lower)
stages of visual processing respond to simple features like edges, while
neurons at later (higher) stages respond to complex features like faces.
More recent experiments using neuroimaging methods like fMRI have
revealed much the same thing in human brains.
You can even build artificial ‘perceiving systems’ this way – at least
rudimentary ones. The computer scientist David Marr’s classic 1982
computational theory of vision is both a standard reference for the
bottom-up view of perception and a practical cookbook for the design
and construction of artificial vision systems. More recent machine vision
systems implementing artificial neural networks – such as ‘deep learning’
networks – are nowadays achieving impressive performance levels, in
some situations comparable to what humans can do. These systems, too,
are frequently based on bottom-up theories.
With all these points in its favour, the bottom-up ‘how things seem’
view of perception seems to be on pretty solid ground.
—
Ludwig Wittgenstein: ‘Why do people say that it was natural to think
that the sun went round the Earth rather than that the Earth turned on
its axis?’
Elizabeth Anscombe: ‘I suppose, because it looked as if the sun went
round the Earth.’
Ludwig Wittgenstein: ‘Well, what would it have looked like if it had
looked as if the Earth turned on its axis?’
In this delightful exchange between Wittgenstein and his fellow
philosopher (and biographer) Elizabeth Anscombe, the legendary
German thinker uses the Copernican revolution to illustrate the point that
how things seem is not necessarily how they are. Although it seems as
though the sun goes around the Earth, it is of course the Earth rotating

around its own axis that gives us night and day, and it is the sun, not the
Earth, that sits at the centre of the solar system. Nothing new here, you
might think, and you’d be right. But Wittgenstein was driving at
something deeper. His real message for Anscombe was that even with a
greater understanding of how things actually are, at some level things
still appear the same way they always did. The sun rises in the east and
sets in the west, same as always.
As with the solar system, so with perception. I open my eyes and it
seems as though there’s a real world out there. Today, I’m at home in
Brighton. There are no cypress trees like there were in Santa Cruz, just
the usual scatter of objects on my desk, a red chair in the corner, and
beyond the window a totter of chimney pots. These objects seem to have
specific shapes and colours, and for the ones closer at hand, smells and
textures too. This is how things seem.
Although it may seem as though my senses provide transparent
windows onto a mind-independent reality, and that perception is a
process of ‘reading out’ sensory data, what’s really going on is – I
believe – quite different. Perceptions do not come from the bottom up or
the outside in, they come primarily from the top down, or the inside out.
What we experience is built from the brain’s predictions, or ‘best
guesses’, about the causes of sensory signals. As with the Copernican
revolution, this top-down view of perception remains consistent with
much of the existing evidence, leaving unchanged many aspects of how
things seem, while at the same time changing everything.
This is by no means a wholly new idea. The first glimmers of a topdown theory of perception emerge in ancient Greece, with Plato’s
Allegory of the Cave. Prisoners, chained and facing a blank wall all their
lives, see only the play of shadows cast by objects passing by a fire
behind them, and they give the shadows names, because for them the
shadows are what is real. The allegory is that our own conscious
perceptions are just like these shadows, indirect reflections of hidden
causes that we can never directly encounter.
More than a thousand years later, but still a thousand years ago, the
Arab scholar Ibn al Haytham wrote that perception, in the here and now,
depends on processes of ‘judgement and inference’ rather than providing
direct access to an objective reality. Hundreds of years later again,
Immanuel Kant realised that the chaos of unrestricted sensory data would

always remain meaningless without being given structure by pre-existing
conceptions, which for him included a priori frameworks like space and
time. Kant’s term noumenon refers to ‘things in themselves’ – Ding an
sich – a mind-independent reality that will always be inaccessible to
human perception, hidden behind a sensory veil.
In neuroscience the story gets going with the German physicist and
physiologist Hermann von Helmholtz. In the late nineteenth century,
among a string of influential contributions, Helmholtz proposed the idea
of perception as a process of ‘unconscious inference’. The contents of
perception, he argued, are not given by sensory signals themselves but
have to be inferred by combining these signals with the brain’s
expectations or beliefs about their causes. In calling this process
unconscious, Helmholtz understood that we are not aware of the
mechanisms by which perceptual inferences happen, only of the results.
Perceptual judgements – his ‘unconscious inferences’ – keep track of
their causes in the world by continually and actively updating perceptual
best guesses as new sensory data arrive. Helmholtz saw himself as
providing a scientific version of Kant’s insight that perception cannot
allow us to know things in the world directly – that we can only infer that
things are there, behind the sensory veil.
Helmholtz’s central idea of ‘perception as inference’ has been
remarkably influential, taking on many different forms throughout the
twentieth century. In the 1950s, the ‘new look’ movement in psychology
emphasised how social and cultural factors could influence perception.
For example, one widely circulated study found that children from poor
families overestimated the size of coins, while those from well-to-do
families didn’t. Unfortunately, many experiments of this kind – while
fascinating – were poorly done by today’s methodological standards, so
the results can’t always be trusted.
In the 1970s, the psychologist Richard Gregory built on Helmholtz’s
ideas in a different way, with his theory of perception as a kind of neural
‘hypothesis-testing’. According to Gregory, just as scientists test and
update scientific hypotheses by obtaining data from experiments, the
brain is continually formulating perceptual hypotheses about the way the
world is – based on past experiences and other forms of stored
information – and testing these hypotheses by acquiring data from the

sensory organs. Perceptual content, for Gregory, is determined by the
brain’s best-supported hypotheses.
After fading in and out of the spotlight over the half century since
then, the idea of perception as inference has gained new momentum in
the last decade or so. A variety of new theories have blossomed under the
general headings of ‘predictive coding’ and ‘predictive processing’.
Although these theories differ in their details, they share the common
proposal that perception depends on brain-based inference of some kind.
My own take on Helmholtz’s enduring idea, and on its contemporary
incarnations, is best captured by the notion of perception as controlled
hallucination, a phrase I first heard from the British psychologist Chris
Frith many years ago. † The essential ingredients of the controlled
hallucination view, as I think of it, are as follows.
First, the brain is constantly making predictions about the causes of its
sensory signals, predictions which cascade in a top-down direction
through the brain’s perceptual hierarchies (the grey arrows in the image
opposite). If you happen to be looking at a coffee cup, your visual cortex
will be formulating predictions about the causes of the sensory signals
that originate from this coffee cup.
Second, sensory signals – which stream into the brain from the bottom
up, or outside in – keep these perceptual predictions tied in useful ways
to their causes: in this case, a coffee cup. These signals serve as
prediction errors registering the difference between what the brain
expects and what it gets at every level of processing. By adjusting topdown predictions so as to suppress bottom-up prediction errors, the
brain’s perceptual best guesses maintain their grip on their causes in the
world. In this view, perception happens through a continual process of
prediction error minimisation.

Fig. 4: Perception as top-down inference.

The third and most important ingredient in the controlled
hallucination view is the claim that perceptual experience – in this case
the subjective experience of ‘seeing a coffee cup’ – is determined by the
content of the (top-down) predictions, and not by the (bottom-up) sensory
signals. We never experience sensory signals themselves, we only ever
experience interpretations of them.
Mix these ingredients together and we’ve cooked up a Copernican
inversion for how to think about perception. It seems as though the world
is revealed directly to our conscious minds through our sensory organs.
With this mindset, it is natural to think of perception as a process of
bottom-up feature detection – a ‘reading’ of the world around us. But
what we actually perceive is a top-down, inside-out neuronal fantasy that
is reined in by reality, not a transparent window onto whatever that
reality may be.
And – to channel Wittgenstein once more – what would it seem like,
if it seemed as if perception was a top-down best guess? Well, just as the
sun still rises in the east and sets in the west, if it seemed as if perception
was a controlled hallucination, the coffee cup on the table – the entirety
of anyone’s perceptual experience – would still seem the same way it
always did, and always will.
When we think about hallucination, we typically think of some kind
of internally generated perception, a seeing or a hearing of something
that isn’t actually there – as can happen in schizophrenia, or in
psychedelic adventures like those of Albert Hofmann. These associations

place hallucination in contrast to ‘normal’ perception, which is assumed
to reflect things that actually exist out in the world. On the top-down
view of perception, this sharp distinction becomes a matter of degree.
Both ‘normal’ perception and ‘abnormal’ hallucination involve internally
generated predictions about the causes of sensory inputs, and both share a
core set of mechanisms in the brain. The difference is that in ‘normal’
perception, what we perceive is tied to – controlled by – causes in the
world, whereas in the case of hallucination our perceptions have, to some
extent, lost their grip on these causes. When we hallucinate, our
perceptual predictions are not properly updated in light of prediction
errors.
If perception is controlled hallucination, then – equally – hallucination
can be thought of as uncontrolled perception. They are different, but to
ask where to draw the line is like asking where the boundary is between
day and night.
—
Let’s take the controlled hallucination theory for a spin by asking what it
means to perceptually experience colour.
Our visual system, amazing though it is, only responds to a tiny slice
of the full electromagnetic spectrum, nestled in between the lows of
infra-red and the highs of ultra-violet. Every colour that we perceive,
indeed every part of the totality of each of our visual worlds, is based on
this thin slice of reality. Just knowing this is enough to tell us that
perceptual experience cannot be a comprehensive representation of an
external objective world. It is both less than that and more than that.
Ask a neurophysiologist and she may say that you perceive a
particular colour when the colour-sensitive cone cells in your retina are
activated in a certain proportion. This is not wrong, but it’s far from the
whole story. There is no one-to-one mapping between activities of
colour-sensitive cells and colour experience. The colour you experience
depends on a complex interplay between the light reflected from a
surface and the general illumination within the environment in which you
happen to be. More precisely, it depends on how your brain makes
inferences – best guesses –about how this interaction plays out.

Take a white piece of paper outdoors and it still looks white, even
though the light it reflects now has a very different spectral composition,
thanks to the differences between (blueish) sunlight and (yellowish)
indoor light. Your visual system automatically compensates for these
differences in ambient lighting – it ‘discounts the illuminant’, as vision
researchers like to say – so that your experience of colour picks out an
invariant property of the paper: the way in which the paper reflects light.
The brain infers this invariant property as its best guess of the causes of
its continually changing sensory inputs. Whiteness is the
phenomenological aspect of this inference – it is how the brain’s
inferences about this invariant property appear in our conscious
experience.
This means that colour is not a definite property of things-inthemselves. Rather, colour is a useful device that evolution has hit upon
so that the brain can recognise and keep track of objects in changing
lighting conditions. When I have the subjective experience of seeing the
red chair in the corner of the room, this doesn’t mean that the chair
actually is red – because what could it even mean for a chair to possess a
phenomenological property like redness? Chairs aren’t red just as they
aren’t ugly or old-fashioned or avant-garde. Instead, the surface of the
chair has a particular property, the way-in-which-it-reflects-light, that my
brain keeps track of through its mechanisms of perception. Redness is the
subjective, phenomenological aspect of this process.
Does this mean that the chair’s redness has moved from being ‘out
there’ in the world to ‘in here’ inside the brain? In one sense the answer
is clearly ‘no’. There’s no red in the brain in the naive sense of there
being some kind of red pigment – or ‘figment’ – inside the head, to be
inspected by a miniature video camera which feeds its output into yet
another visual system which itself has a mini camera inside it … and so
on. To assume that a perceived property of the outside world (redness)
has to be somehow re-instantiated in the brain, in order for perception to
happen, is to fall foul of what the philosopher Daniel Dennett has called
the fallacy of ‘double transduction’. According to this fallacy, an external
‘redness’ is transduced by the retina into patterns of electrical activity
which then have to be reconstituted – transduced again – into an internal
‘redness’. As Dennett points out, this kind of reasoning explains nothing.
The only sense in which one could locate redness ‘in the brain’ is simply

because that’s where the mechanisms underlying perceptual experience
are to be found. These mechanisms are, of course, not red.
When I look at a red chair, the redness I experience depends both on
properties of the chair and on properties of my brain. It corresponds to
the content of a set of perceptual predictions about the ways in which a
specific kind of surface reflects light. There is no redness-as-such in the
world or in the brain. As Paul Cézanne said, ‘colour is the place where
our brain and the universe meet.’
The larger claim here is that this applies far beyond the realm of
colour experience. It applies to all of perception. The immersive
multisensory panorama of your perceptual scene, right here and right
now, is a reaching out from the brain to the world, a writing as much as a
reading. The entirety of perceptual experience is a neuronal fantasy that
remains yoked to the world through a continuous making and remaking
of perceptual best guesses, of controlled hallucinations.
You could even say that we’re all hallucinating all the time. It’s just
that when we agree about our hallucinations, that’s what we call reality.
—
Let’s consider three examples of how perceptual expectations shape
conscious experience, examples which you can experience for yourself.
If you were in any way connected to social media, or read a
newspaper, during a particular week in February 2015, you’ll remember
‘The Dress’. On the Wednesday morning of that week I arrived in my
office to find a deluge of emails and voicemails. I’d recently co-authored
a short book on visual illusions, and the media were scrambling to find
explanations for a suddenly ubiquitous internet phenomenon. ‘The Dress’
was a serendipitous photo in which a particular dress looked blue and
black to some people, but white and gold to others. ‡ Those who saw it
one way were so convinced they were right, they could not believe
anyone would see it differently – and so the internet erupted with claim
and counterclaim.
At first I thought it might be a hoax. To me, The Dress looked so
obviously blue and black, as it did to the first four people in the lab that I
showed it to, that it was both a relief and a surprise when the fifth said

white and gold. So it turned out, as with the world at large, that about half
the lab went for blue–black and the other half for white–gold.
An hour later I was on the BBC trying to explain what was going on.
The emerging consensus was that the effect had to do with discounting
the illuminant – the process of taking ambient light into account when
perceiving colours. The idea was that this process might work differently
for different people, in a way that normally isn’t apparent and that wasn’t
previously known, but which just so happens to make a difference for
The Dress.
People quickly pointed out that as a photo The Dress is overexposed
and lacking in context – the dress itself fills most of the image – which
might play tricks with how the brain generates colour from context. If,
for some reason, your visual system is accustomed to yellowish ambient
light – perhaps you spend too much time indoors – then your visual
system might be more likely to infer blue–black on the assumption of a
yellowish illuminant. If, on the other hand, you are a happy healthy
outdoor person, with a visual cortex frequently bathed in blueish
sunlight, then maybe you’d see white–gold.
Straight away, people started doing all sorts of experiments: staring at
the photo in a dimly lit room before rushing outside into the daylight;
correlating the prevalence of white–gold reports with average sunshine
rates in different countries; looking at whether old people are more likely
to see blue–black than young people. Before long a cottage industry had
sprung into existence testing these and a thousand other hypotheses.
The fact that people have such different experiences and report them
with such confidence, for the very same image, is compelling evidence
that our perceptual experiences of the world are internal constructions,
shaped by the idiosyncrasies of our personal biology and history. Most of
the time, we assume that we each see the world in roughly the same way,
and most of the time perhaps we do. But even if this is so, it isn’t because
red chairs really are red, it’s because it takes an unusual situation like
The Dress to tease apart the fine differences in how our brains settle on
their perceptual best guesses.
—

The second example is a much-loved visual illusion called Adelson’s
Checkerboard. This example shows that the influence of predictions on
perception isn’t restricted to weird situations like The Dress, it happens
everywhere and all the time. Take a look at the left-side checkerboard in
the image overleaf, and compare the squares A and B. Hopefully A looks
darker than B. It does to me, and it does to everyone I’ve ever shown this
to. No hint of individual differences here.
In fact, A and B are precisely the same shade of grey. The
checkerboard on the right proves this by joining up A and B with a
rectangle that has a uniform shade of grey. Look as closely as you like,
there are no changes of shading, no transitions of any kind. A and B are
the same grey, though in the left-side checkerboard they persist in
looking different. Knowing that they are the same doesn’t help. I’ve
stared at these images thousands of times, and A and B (on the left)
stubbornly persist in seeming to be different shades of grey.§
What’s going on here is that the perception of greyness is determined
not by the actual light waves coming from A or B – these are the same –
but by the brain’s best guess about what caused these particular
combinations of wavelengths, and – as with The Dress – this depends on
context. B is in shadow, A is not, and the brain’s visual system has
inscribed deep in its circuitry the knowledge that objects in shadow
appear darker. In just the same way that the brain adjusts its perceptual
inferences on the basis of ambient lighting, it adjusts its inferences about
the shade of B on the basis of prior knowledge about shadows. This is
why, in the left-side checkerboard, we perceive B as being lighter than
the (shadow-free) A. By contrast, for the checkerboard on the right, the
shadow context is disrupted by the superimposed grey bars, so we can
see that A and B are in fact identical.

Fig. 5: Adelson’s Checkerboard.

This is all completely automatic. You are not – or at least were not –
aware that your brain possesses and uses prior expectations about
shadows when making its perceptual predictions. It’s also not a failure of
the visual system. A useful visual system is not meant to be a light meter,
of the sort used by photographers. The function of perception, at least to
a first approximation, is to figure out the most likely causes of the
sensory signals, not to deliver awareness of the sensory signals
themselves – whatever that might mean.
—
The final example reveals just how quickly new predictions can influence
conscious perception. Take a look at the image below. Probably all you
can see is a mess of black and white splodges. Then, after you’ve read
the rest of this sentence, have a look at the image on p. 95, before
returning here.

Fig. 6: What is this?

Good, you’re back. Now have another look at the image on this page
and it ought to look rather different. Where previously there was a
splodgy mess, there are now distinct objects, things are there, and
something is happening. This is a ‘two-tone’ or ‘Mooney image’. Once
seen, it is hard to unsee. Two-tone images are created by taking a picture,
rendering it in greyscale, and carefully thresholding it so that the details
are lost in the extremes of black and white – the ‘two tones’. If done the
right way, and with the right picture, it becomes very hard to figure out
what’s going on. That is, until you see the original, in which case the
two-tone image suddenly resolves into a coherent scene.
What’s remarkable about this example is that, when you look at the
original two-tone image now, the sensory signals arriving at your eyes
haven’t changed at all from the first time you saw it. All that’s changed
are your brain’s predictions about the causes of this sensory data, and this
changes what you consciously see.
This phenomenon is not unique to vision. There are compelling
auditory examples too, which are known as ‘sine wave speech’. Here, a
spoken phrase is processed by chopping off all the high frequencies that

make normal speech comprehensible. The result usually sounds like
noisy whistling, making no sense at all – the auditory equivalent of a
two-tone image. Then you listen to the original unprocessed speech, and
then the ‘sine wave’ version again, and suddenly all becomes clear. Just
as with the two-tone images, having a strong prediction about the causes
of sensory signals changes – enriches – perceptual experience.
—
Collectively, these examples – while admittedly and deliberately simple –
reveal perception to be a generative, creative act; a proactive, contextladen interpretation of, and engagement with, sensory signals. And as I
mentioned earlier, the principle that perceptual experience is built from
brain-based predictions applies across the board – not only to vision and
hearing, but to all of our perceptions, all of the time.
One important implication of this principle is that we never
experience the world ‘as it is’. Indeed, as Kant pointed out with his
noumenon, it is difficult to know what it would mean to do so. Even
something as basic as colour, as we’ve seen, exists only in the interaction
between a world and a mind. So while we might be surprised when
perceptual illusions – like those we’ve just encountered – reveal a
discrepancy between what we see (or hear, or touch) and what’s there, we
should be careful not to judge perceptual experiences solely in terms of
their ‘accuracy’ in directly coinciding with reality. Accurate – ‘veridical’
– perception, understood this way, is a chimera. The controlled
hallucination of our perceptual world has been designed by evolution to
enhance our survival prospects, not to be a transparent window onto an
external reality, a window that anyway makes no conceptual sense. In the
following chapters we will delve more deeply into these ideas, but before
we do, it’s worth heading off a couple of objections.
The first objection is that the controlled hallucination view of
perception denies undeniable aspects of the real world. ‘If everything we
experience is just a kind of hallucination,’ you might complain, ‘then go
jump in front of a train and see what happens.’
Nothing in what I say should be taken to deny the existence of things
in the world, be they onrushing trains or cats or coffee cups. The
‘control’ in controlled hallucination is just as important as the

‘hallucination’. Describing perception this way doesn’t mean that
anything goes, it means that the way in which things in the world appear
in perceptual experience is a construction of the brain.
Having said that, it is useful to distinguish between what the
Enlightenment philosopher John Locke called ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’
qualities. Locke proposed that the primary qualities of an object are those
that exist independently of an observer, such as occupying space, having
solidity, and moving. An oncoming train has these primary qualities in
abundance, which is why jumping in front of one is a bad idea, whether
or not you are observing it, and whatever beliefs you might hold about
the nature of perception. Secondary qualities are those whose existence
does depend on an observer. These are properties of objects that produce
sensations – or ‘ideas’ – in the mind, and cannot be said to independently
exist in the object. Colour is a good example of a secondary quality, since
the experience of colour depends on the interaction of a particular kind of
perceptual apparatus with an object.
From a controlled hallucination perspective, both primary and
secondary qualities of objects can give rise to perceptual experience
through an active, constructive process. In neither case, though, is the
content of the perceptual experience identical to the corresponding
quality of the object.
The second objection has to do with our ability to perceive new
things. One might worry that we’d need a pre-formed best guess for
anything that we might ever perceive, so that we are forever trapped in a
perceptual world of the already expected. Imagine that you’ve never seen
a gorilla, not in real life, on TV, or in a film – nor even in a book – and
then you unexpectedly encounter one ambling along the street. I
guarantee that you will now see a gorilla, a new and probably rather
scary perceptual experience. In a world of the already expected, how can
this happen?
The short answer is that ‘seeing a gorilla’ is never a completely new
perceptual experience. Gorillas are animals with arms and legs and fur,
and you – and your ancestors – will have seen other creatures that have
some or all of these features. More generally, gorillas are objects that
have defined (though furry) edges, that move in reasonably predictable
ways, and that reflect light in the same way that other objects of similar
size, colour, and texture do. The novel experience of ‘seeing a gorilla’ is

built up from perceptual predictions operating over many different levels
of granularity and acquired over many different timescales – from
predictions about luminance and edges to predictions about faces and
posture – that together sculpt a new overall perceptual best guess, so that
you see a gorilla for the first time.
The longer answer involves learning more about how the brain
performs the wickedly complex neural gymnastics involved in perceptual
inference – and this is precisely where we are headed in the next chapter.

Fig. 7: This is what. Reference image for fig. 6.¶

Notes
signals from each level: Perceptual hierarchies are not strictly insulated from each other. A good
rule of thumb is that there is more cross-modal interaction the further you get from the sensory
periphery. See Felleman & Van Essen (1991); Stein & Meredith (1993).
More recent experiments: Grill-Spector & Malach (2004).
computational theory of vision: Marr (1982).
impressive performance levels: He et al. (2016).
delightful exchange: Anscombe (1959), p. 151, italics in original.
judgement and inference: From The Optics of Ibn al-Haytham, c.1030, translated in Sabra (1989).
The history is told in more detail in Jakob Hohwy’s terrific The Predictive Mind (2013).

Helmholtz saw himself: Swanson (2016).
those from well-to-do families didn’t: Bruner & Goodman (1947).
Perceptual content: Gregory (1980).
theories differ in their details: Clark (2013); Clark (2016); Hohwy (2013); Rao & Ballard (1999).
top-down predictions: Arguably, not all predictions are top-down, nor are prediction errors
necessarily bottom-up. ‘Bottom-up predictions’ can be thought of as constraints which reflect
global and stable aspects of perceptual inference (Teufel & Fletcher, 2020). An example of a
perceptual constraint could be the over-representation of vertical and horizontal orientations in
natural images. The influence of shadows on luminance – discussed later – might also be a
bottom-up predictive constraint.
Dennett points out: See Dennett (1998). Here’s another example: In order to hear music, we don’t
need a little band in the head and an intricate system of intracranial microphones. Daniel
Dennett is also responsible for the happy turn of phrase ‘mental figment’.
colour is the place: Gasquet (1991). This quote has also been attributed to Paul Klee.
agree about our hallucinations: Many thanks to peer-reviewed rap artist Baba Brinkman for this
provocative line about reality. There’ll be more about the perception of ‘what is real’ in
chapter 6.
short book on visual illusions: A recent study by Biyu He and colleagues has looked at how
neural dynamics differ when a Mooney image is recognised, compared to when it is not. See
Flounders et al. (2019).
these and … other hypotheses: Brainard & Hurlbert (2015); Witzel et al. (2017).
changes what you consciously see: Eye Benders (Gifford & Seth, 2013).
compelling auditory examples: Chris Darwin has some excellent examples of sine wave speech
online at www.lifesci.sussex.ac.uk/home/Chris_Darwin/SWS. I use another example in my
2017 TED talk:
www.ted.com/talks/anil_seth_your_brain_hallucinates_your_conscious_reality. There are also
auditory equivalents of The Dress. One example is a sound which some people hear as
‘Yanny’ and others as ‘Laurel’ (Pressnitzer et al., 2018). In 2020 a TikTok video appeared in
which an ambiguous tinny noise from a cheap toy can be heard either as ‘green needle’ or
‘brainstorm’, depending on which words you are reading (time.com/5873627/green-needlebrainstorm-explained).
perceptual experience is built: See de Lange et al. (2018) for a review of experiments showing
how expectations shape perception.
Accurate – ‘veridical’ – perception: Another useful intuition pump for thinking about perceptual
veridicality is peripheral vision – that part of the visual field away from the centre of your gaze
(foveal vision). The visual periphery has a much lower photoreceptor density than the fovea,
yet visual experience in the periphery doesn’t seem blurry. Does this mean that peripheral
vision is less veridical than foveal vision, because it manifests an ‘illusion of sharpness’ (or
more specifically an illusion of ‘non-blurriness’)? No! Sharpness and blurriness are properties
of perceptual experience that are relative to the sensory data that each part of the visual system
is tuned to. See Haun (2021) for an illuminating discussion, Lettvin (1976) for historical
context, and Hoffman et al. (2015) for a wide-ranging discussion of perceptual
(non-)veridicality.
Locke proposed: John Locke, An Essay concerning Human Understanding (1689), 14th edn
(1753). Although the example of colour is intuitive, philosophers have energetically debated
whether it really counts as a secondary quality (Byrne & Hilbert, 2011). A related distinction
that appears in the philosophical literature is between different kinds of ‘kinds’ – where the
differences lie in the conditions necessary for something to exist. For example, money requires

social conventions to exist and so is a ‘social kind’. Water does not require social conventions
to exist, and so is a ‘natural kind’.
*
†
‡
§
¶

The familiar but completely wrong idea that humans have only five senses can be traced
back to Aristotle’s De Anima – ‘On the Soul’ – written around 350 BC.
The origin of this phrase can be traced to a seminar given in the 1990s by Ramesh Jain. I
have tried to trace it back further, but without success.
You can find a colour image of The Dress here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_dress.
What do you see?
When knowledge fails to affect perception, we call that perception ‘cognitively
impenetrable’.
Figures 6 and 7 from Teufel, C., Dakin, S. C. & Fletcher, P. C. (2018), ‘Prior objectknowledge sharpens properties of early visual feature detectors’, Scientific Reports,
8:10853. Used with permission of the authors and under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License, with thanks to Christoph Teufel.

5
The Wizard of Odds
The Reverend Thomas Bayes (1702–1761) – a Presbyterian minister,
philosopher, and statistician, who lived much of his life in Tunbridge
Wells, in southern England – never got around to publishing the theorem
that immortalised his name. His ‘Essay towards Solving a Problem in the
Doctrine of Chances’ was presented to the Royal Society in London two
years after his death by fellow preacher-philosopher Richard Price, and
much of the mathematical heavy lifting was done later on by the French
mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace. But it is Bayes whose name is
forever tied to a way of reasoning called ‘inference to the best
explanation’, the insights from which are central to understanding how
conscious perceptions are built from brain-based best guesses.
Bayesian reasoning is all about reasoning with probabilities. More
specifically, it is about how to make optimal inferences – what we’ve
been calling ‘best guesses’ – under conditions of uncertainty. ‘Inference’,
a term we’ve encountered already, just means reaching conclusions on
the basis of evidence and reason. Bayesian inference is an example of
abductive reasoning, as distinct from deductive or inductive reasoning.
Deduction means reaching conclusions by logic alone: if Jim is older
than Jane, and Jane is older than Joe, then Jim is older than Joe. If the
premises are true and the rules of logic are followed, deductive
inferences are guaranteed to be correct. Induction involves reaching
conclusions through extrapolating from a series of observations: the sun
has risen in the east for all of recorded history, therefore it always rises in
the east. Unlike deductive inferences, inductive inferences can be wrong:
the first three balls I pulled out of the bag were green, therefore all balls
in the bag are green. This may or may not be true.
Abductive reasoning – the sort formalised by Bayesian inference – is
all about finding the best explanation for a set of observations, when
these observations are incomplete, uncertain, or otherwise ambiguous.
Like inductive reasoning, abductive reasoning can also get things wrong.

In seeking the ‘best explanation’, abductive reasoning can be thought of
as reasoning backward, from observed effects to their most likely causes,
rather than forward, from causes to their effects – as is the case for
deduction and induction.
Here’s an example. Looking out of your bedroom window one
morning, you see the lawn is wet. Did it rain overnight? Perhaps, but it
could also be that you forgot to turn off your garden sprinkler. The aim is
to find the best explanation, or hypothesis, for what you see: given the
lawn is wet, what is the probability (i) that it rained overnight, or (ii) that
you left the sprinkler on? In other words, we want to infer the most likely
cause for the observed data.
Bayesian inference tells us how to do this. It provides an optimal way
of updating our beliefs about something when new data comes in. Bayes’
rule is a mathematical recipe for going from what we already know (the
prior) to what we should believe next (the posterior), based on what we
are learning now (the likelihood). Priors, likelihoods, and posteriors are
often called Bayesian ‘beliefs’ because they represent states of
knowledge rather than states of the world. (Note that a Bayesian belief is
not necessarily something I-as-a-person believe. It makes equal sense to
say that my visual cortex ‘believes’ that the object in front of me is a
coffee cup as to say that I believe that Neil Armstrong landed on the
moon.)
Priors are the probabilities of something being the case before new
data arrives. Let’s say the prior probability of overnight rain is very low –
perhaps you live in Las Vegas. The prior probability of having left the
sprinkler on will depend on how often you use the sprinkler, and on how
forgetful you are. It is also low, but not as low as the prior probability of
rain.
Likelihoods, loosely speaking, are the opposite of posteriors. They
formalise reasoning ‘forward’ from causes to effects: given overnight
rain or overnight sprinkling, what is the probability that the lawn is wet?
Like priors, these can also vary, but for now let’s assume that rain and
accidental sprinkling are equally likely to make for a wet lawn.
Bayes’ rule combines priors and likelihoods to come up with posterior
probabilities for each hypothesis. The rule itself is simple: the posterior is
just the prior multiplied by the likelihood, and divided by a second prior
(this is the ‘prior on the data’ – which in this case is the prior probability

of a wet lawn – we don’t need to worry about this here since it is the
same for each hypothesis).
Observing a wet lawn in the morning, a Good Bayesian should choose
the hypothesis with the highest posterior probability – this being the most
probable explanation of the data. Since in our example the prior
probability of overnight rain is lower than that of accidental sprinkling,
the posterior probability for rain will also be lower. A Good Bayesian
will therefore choose the sprinkler hypothesis. This hypothesis is the
Bayesian best guess of the causes of the observed data – it is the
‘inference to the best explanation’.
If this mostly seems like common sense, that’s because in this
particular example, it is. However, there are many situations in which
Bayesian inference departs from what common sense might suggest. For
instance, it is easy to wrongly conclude that you have a nasty disease on
the basis of a positive medical test, thanks to a common tendency to
overestimate the prior probability of having rare diseases. Even if a test is
99 per cent accurate, a positive result may only slightly increase the
posterior probability that you have the corresponding disease, if its
prevalence in the population is sufficiently low.
Let’s go back to the wet lawn scenario and take it a little further. After
inspecting your own lawn, you glance over at your neighbour’s lawn, and
you see that it too is wet. This is significant new information. The
likelihoods for each hypothesis are now different: for the sprinkler
hypothesis, only your lawn should be wet, but for the rain hypothesis
both lawns would be wet. (Likelihoods, remember, go from assumed
causes to observed data.) Being a Good Bayesian, you update your
posterior probabilities and find that overnight rain is now the best
explanation for what you’ve seen – so you change your mind.
A powerful feature of Bayesian inference is that it takes the reliability
of information into account when updating best guesses. Information that
is (estimated to be) reliable should have a larger influence on Bayesian
beliefs than information that is (estimated to be) unreliable. Imagine that
your bedroom window is dirty, and you’ve lost your glasses. It looks like
your neighbour’s lawn might be wet, but your eyesight is so bad, and the
window so grubby, that this new information is highly unreliable, and
you know it. In this case, although the rain hypothesis becomes slightly

more probable when you glance over the fence, the original hypothesis of
accidental sprinkling might still remain in the lead.
In many situations, the process of updating of Bayesian best guesses
with new data happens over and over again, in an endless cycle of
inference. On each iteration, the previous posterior becomes the new
prior. This new prior is then used to interpret the next round of data to
form a new posterior – a new best guess – and the cycle repeats. If your
lawn is wet two mornings in a row, your best guess about the cause on
the second day should be informed by your best guess on the first day,
and so on as each new day comes along.
Bayesian inference has been applied to great benefit in all sorts of
contexts, from medical diagnosis to searching for missing nuclear
submarines, with new applications emerging all the time. Even the
scientific method itself can be understood as a Bayesian process, in
which scientific hypotheses are updated by new evidence from
experiments. Conceiving of science in this way is distinct from both the
‘paradigm shifts’ of Thomas Kuhn, in which entire scientific edifices are
overturned as inconsistent evidence accumulates, and the ‘falsificationist’
views of Karl Popper, where hypotheses are raised and tested one by one,
like balloons released into the sky and then shot down. In the philosophy
of science, the Bayesian perspective has most in common with the views
of the Hungarian philosopher Imre Lakatos, whose analysis focuses on
what makes scientific research programmes work in practice, rather than
on what they might ideally consist of.
A Bayesian view of science of course means that scientists’ prior
beliefs about the validity of their theories will influence the extent to
which these theories are updated or undermined by new data. For
example, I’m aware that I have a strong prior belief that brains are
Bayesian-like prediction machines. This strong belief will not only shape
how I interpret experimental evidence, it will also determine the sorts of
experiments that I do, to generate new evidence relevant to my beliefs.
Sometimes I wonder how much evidence it would take to overturn my
Bayesian belief that the brain is essentially Bayesian.
—

Let’s return to our imagined brain, quiet and dark inside its skull, trying
to figure out what’s out there in the world. We can now recognise this
challenge as an ideal opportunity to invoke Bayesian inference. When the
brain is making best guesses about the causes of its noisy and ambiguous
sensory signals, it is following the principles of the Reverend Thomas
Bayes.
Perceptual priors can be encoded at many levels of abstraction and
flexibility. These range from very general and relatively fixed priors such
as ‘light comes from above’ to situation-specific priors like ‘the
approaching furry object is a gorilla’. Likelihoods in the brain encode
mappings from potential causes to sensory signals. These are the
‘forward reasoning’ components of perceptual inference, and as with
priors they can operate at many different scales of time and space. The
brain continually combines these priors and likelihoods according to
Bayes’ rule, so that every fraction of a second a new Bayesian posterior –
a perceptual best guess – is formed. And each new posterior serves as a
prior for the next round of ever-changing sensory input. Perception is a
rolling process, not a static snapshot.
The reliability of sensory information plays an important role here
too. Unless you happen to be in a zoo, the prior probability of ‘gorilla’
will be very low when you first catch a glimpse of something indistinctly
dark and furry in the distance. Because whatever-it-is is far away, the
estimated reliability of this visual input will also be low, so that your
perceptual best guess is unlikely to settle immediately on ‘gorilla’. But as
the animal gets closer, visual signals become both more reliable and more
informative, so that your brain’s best guesses will move through a series
of options – large black dog, man in gorilla suit, actual gorilla – until you
confidently perceive the gorilla, hopefully still with enough time to run
away.
The simplest way to think about Bayesian beliefs – priors, likelihoods,
and posteriors – is as being single numbers between 0 (representing zero
probability) and 1 (representing 100 per cent probability). However, to
understand how the reliability of sensory signals influences perceptual
inference, and indeed to see how Bayes’ rule might actually be
implemented within the brain, we need to go a little deeper and think in
terms of probability distributions instead.

The diagram below shows an example probability distribution for a
variable X. A variable, in mathematics, is just a symbol that can take
different values. A probability distribution for X describes the probability
that the value of X lies within a particular range. As the diagram shows,
it can be represented by a curve. The probability that X lies within a
particular range is given by the area under the curve corresponding to
that range. In this example, the probability that X lies between two and
four is much higher than the probability that it lies between four and six.
As with all probability distributions, the total area under the curve sums
to exactly one. This is because when all possible outcomes are
considered, something has to happen.

Fig. 8: A Gaussian probability distribution.

Probability distributions can have many different shapes. One
common family of shapes, of which the present curve is an example, is
the ‘normal’, ‘Gaussian’, or ‘bell curve’ distribution.These distributions
are fully specified by an average value or mean (where the curve peaks,
in this case 3) and a precision (how spread out it is; the higher the
precision, the less spread out). These quantities – mean and precision –
are called the parameters of the distribution.*
The idea here is that Bayesian beliefs can be usefully represented by
Gaussian probability distributions of this kind. Intuitively, the mean
specifies the content of the belief, and the precision specifies the
confidence with which the brain holds this belief. A sharply peaked (high
precision) distribution corresponds to a high confidence belief. As we’ll

see, it is this ability to represent confidence – or reliability – that gives
Bayesian inference its power.
Let’s return to the gorilla example. The relevant priors, likelihoods,
and posteriors can now be thought of as probability distributions, each
specified by a mean and a precision. For each distribution, the mean
signifies the probability of ‘gorilla’, and the precision corresponds to the
confidence the brain has in this probability estimate.
What happens when new sensory data arrives? The process of
Bayesian updating is easiest to see graphically. In the next diagram, the
dotted curve represents the prior probability of encountering a gorilla.
This curve has a low mean, indicating that gorillas are assumed to be
unlikely, and a relatively high precision, indicating that this prior belief is
held with high confidence. The dashed curve is the likelihood,
corresponding to the sensory input. Here, the mean is higher, but the
precision is lower: if a gorilla really was out there, these might be the
sensory data you’d get, but you’re not too confident about this. The solid
curve is the posterior, representing the probability of there being a gorilla,
given the sensory data. As always, this is obtained by applying Bayes’
rule. When dealing with Gaussian probability distributions, applying
Bayes’ rule amounts to multiplying the dotted and dashed curves
together, while keeping the area under the resulting curve – the posterior
– limited to exactly 1.

Fig. 9: Bayesian inference with Gaussian probability
distributions for best-guessing a gorilla sighting.

Notice that the peak of the posterior is closer to the prior than it is to
the likelihood. This is because the combination of two Gaussian
distributions depends on both the means and the precisions. In this case,
because the likelihood has relatively low precision – the sensory signals
indicating ‘gorilla’ are estimated to be unreliable – the posterior best
guess hasn’t shifted very far from the prior. However, the next moment
you look, the sensory data from the gorilla may be a little clearer because
it is now closer to you, and the new prior is given by the previous
posterior, so the new posterior – the new best guess – will shift closer
towards ‘gorilla’. And so on until it’s time to run away.
Bayes’ theorem provides a standard of optimality for perceptual
inference. It sets out best-case scenarios for what brains should do when
trying to figure out the most likely causes of sensory inputs, whether they
are gorillas or red chairs or cups of coffee. But this is only part of the
story. What Bayes’ theorem doesn’t do is specify how, in terms of neural
mechanisms, the brain accomplishes these feats of best guessing.
Answering this question returns us to the controlled hallucination
theory of perception, and to the central claim that conscious contents are
not merely shaped by perceptual predictions – they are these predictions.
—
In the previous chapter I introduced the idea that perception happens
through a continual process of prediction error minimisation. According
to this idea, the brain is continually generating predictions about sensory
signals and comparing these predictions with the sensory signals that
arrive at the eyes and the ears – and the nose, and the skin, and so on.
The differences between predicted and actual sensory signals give rise to
prediction errors. While perceptual predictions flow predominantly in a
top-down (inside-to-outside) direction, prediction errors flow in a
bottom-up (outside-to-inside) direction. These prediction error signals are
used by the brain to update its predictions, ready for the next round of
sensory inputs. What we perceive is given by the content of all the topdown predictions together, once sensory prediction errors have been
minimised – or ‘explained away’ – as far as possible.
The controlled hallucination view shares many features with other
‘predictive’ theories of perception and brain function, most prominently

predictive processing. There is, however, an important difference of
emphasis. Predictive processing is a theory about the mechanisms by
which brains accomplish perception (and cognition, and action). The
controlled hallucination view, by contrast, is about how brain
mechanisms explain phenomenological properties of conscious
perception. In other words, predictive processing is a theory about how
brains work, whereas the controlled hallucination view takes this theory
and develops it to account for the nature of conscious experiences.
Importantly, both rest on the bedrock process of prediction error
minimisation.
And it is prediction error minimisation that provides the connection
between controlled hallucinations and Bayesian inference. It takes a
Bayesian claim about what the brain should do and turns it into a
proposal about what it actually does do. By minimising prediction errors
everywhere and all the time, it turns out that the brain is actually
implementing Bayes’ rule. More precisely, it is approximating Bayes’
rule. It is this connection that licenses the idea that perceptual content is a
top-down controlled hallucination, rather than a bottom-up ‘readout’ of
sensory data.
Let’s consider three core components of prediction error minimisation
in the brain: generative models, perceptual hierarchies, and the ‘precision
weighting’ of sensory signals.
Generative models determine the repertoire of perceivable things. In
order to perceive a gorilla, my brain needs to be equipped with a
generative model capable of generating the relevant sensory signals – the
sensory signals that would be expected were a gorilla to be actually
present. These models provide the flow of perceptual predictions which
are compared against incoming sensory data to form prediction errors –
which then prompt updated predictions as the brain tries to minimise
these errors.
Perceptual predictions play out across many scales of space and time,
so that we perceive a structured world full of objects, people, and places.
A high-level prediction to see a gorilla gives rise to lower-level
predictions about limbs, eyes, ears, and fur, which then cascade further
down into predictions about colours, textures, and edges, and finally into
anticipated variations in brightness across the visual field. These
perceptual hierarchies work across the senses and even go beyond

sensory data entirely. If I suddenly hear my mother’s voice, my visual
cortex might tune up its predictions that the approaching figure is my
mother. If I know I’m in the zoo, perceptual regions of my brain will be
more prepared for gorilla sightings than if I’m wandering down the
street.
It’s worth clarifying here that ‘prediction’ in prediction error
minimisation is not necessarily about the future. It simply means going
beyond the data by using a model. In statistics, the essence of prediction
is in catering for the absence of sufficient data. Whether this is because
predictions are about the future – one can think of the future as
‘insufficient data’ – or about some current but incompletely unknown
state of affairs, doesn’t matter.
The final key element of prediction error minimisation is precision
weighting. We’ve already seen how the relative reliability of sensory
signals determines the extent to which perceptual inferences are updated.
Your initial glance at a faraway gorilla, or across at your neighbour’s
lawn through a dirty window, will deliver sensory signals with low
reliability, and so your Bayesian best guess will not shift by very much.
We’ve also seen how reliability is captured by the precision of the
corresponding probability distributions. As the diagram on p. 105
showed, sensory data with low estimated precision have a weaker effect
on updating prior beliefs.
I say ‘estimated precision’ rather than simply ‘precision’ because the
precision of sensory signals is not something that is directly given to the
perceiving brain. It also has to be inferred. The brain is faced not only
with the challenge of figuring out the most likely causes of its sensory
inputs, but also with figuring out how reliable the relevant sensory inputs
are. What this means, in practice, is that the brain continually adjusts the
influence of sensory signals on perceptual inference. It does this by
transiently altering their estimated precision. This is what is meant by the
term ‘precision weighting’. Down-weighting estimated precision means
that sensory signals have less influence on updating best guesses, while
up-weighting means the opposite: a stronger influence of sensory signals
on perceptual inference. In this way, precision weighting plays an
essential role in choreographing the delicate dance between predictions
and prediction errors needed to reach a perceptual best guess.

Although this sounds complicated, we are all intimately familiar with
the role of precision weighting in perception. Increasing the estimated
precision of sensory signals is nothing other than ‘paying attention’.
When you pay attention to something – for example, really trying to see
whether a gorilla is out there in the distance – your brain is increasing the
precision weighting on the corresponding sensory signals, which is
equivalent to increasing their estimated reliability, or turning up their
‘gain’. Thinking about attention this way can explain why sometimes we
don’t see things, even if they are in plain view, and even if we are
looking right at them. If you are paying attention to some sensory data –
increasing their estimated precision – then other sensory data will have
less influence on updating perceptual best guesses.
Remarkably, in some situations unattended sensory data may have no
influence at all. In 1999, the psychologist Daniel Simons developed a
well-known video demonstration of this phenomenon, which he calls
‘inattentional blindness’. If you haven’t seen it, I suggest taking a look
before you read on.†
Here’s what happens. In the demo, Simons’ subjects watched a short
video in which there are two teams, each consisting of three people. One
team is dressed in black, the other in white. Each team has a basketball
which they pass among themselves, while wandering around in
apparently random patterns. The viewer’s job is to count the number of
passes made only between members of the white team. This takes an
effortful focus of attention, since the six players are wandering all over
the place and there are two balls being passed around.
What’s astonishing is that, when doing this, most people completely
fail to notice a person in a black gorilla costume entering stage left,
making various gorilla moves, and exiting stage right. Show them the
same video again, and this time ask them to look for a gorilla: they will
immediately see it, and will often refuse to believe that it’s the same
video. What’s happening is that focusing attention on the players in white
means that the sensory signals from the players in black – and the gorilla
– are afforded low estimated precision, and so have little or no influence
on updating perceptual best guesses.
Something similar happened to me one afternoon many years ago,
while driving to my favourite surf spot in San Diego. I’d taken a left turn
where a ‘no left turn’ sign had recently been installed; a short side road

down to the ocean in the neighbourhood of Del Mar. Because there was
no obvious reason for this new sign, because other cars ahead of me had
just made the same turn, because I’d made this turn probably hundreds of
times over the years, and because I was extremely pissed off about being
unfairly ticketed, I argued in a written deposition that the sign literally
was not visible to me, even though it may have been visible ‘in
principle’. My defence appealed to principles of inattentional blindness.
Yes, there was a new sign – but because of precision weighting in my
brain I was not able to perceive it. I took the case all the way to the
California traffic court, not exactly the supreme court but far enough that
my name appeared on the day’s ‘criminal calendar’. I even prepared a
nice little PowerPoint presentation for the judge, which didn’t help in the
slightest.
Magicians, too, make use of inattentional blindness, even though they
might not describe their craft in these terms. Close-up magic, in
particular, involves a masterful misdirection of people’s attention, so that
they might not notice the queen of spades being placed behind an ear
from where it later seems to appear as if from thin air. Successful
pickpockets also benefit from this quirk of perceptual physiology. I once
witnessed the master pickpocket Apollo Robbins effortlessly relieve
some of my colleagues of their watches, wallets, and purses, a feat which
was even more remarkable since many of them were experts in
perception, knew all about inattentional blindness, and were fully aware
of what Robbins was trying to do.
—
It’s tempting to think of our interaction with the world in the following
way. First, we perceive the world as it is. Then we decide what to do.
Then we do it. Sense, think, act. This may be how things seem, but once
again how things seem is a poor guide to how they actually are. It’s time
to bring action into the picture.
Action is inseparable from perception. Perception and action are so
tightly coupled that they determine and define each other. Every action
alters perception by changing the incoming sensory data, and every
perception is the way it is in order to help guide action. There is simply
no point to perception in the absence of action. We perceive the world

around us in order to act effectively within it, to achieve our goals and –
in the long run – to promote our prospects of survival. We don’t perceive
the world as it is, we perceive it as it is useful for us to do so.
It may even be that action comes first. Instead of picturing the brain as
reaching perceptual best guesses in order to then guide behaviour, we can
think of brains as fundamentally in the business of generating actions,
and continually calibrating these actions using sensory signals, so as to
best achieve the organism’s goals. This view casts the brain as an
intrinsically dynamic, active system, continually probing its environment
and examining the consequences.‡
In predictive processing, action and perception are two sides of the
same coin. Both are underpinned by the minimisation of sensory
prediction errors. Until now, I’ve described this minimisation process in
terms of updating perceptual predictions, but this is not the only
possibility. Prediction errors can also be quenched by performing actions
in order to change the sensory data, so that the new sensory data matches
an existing prediction. Minimising prediction error through action is
called active inference – a term coined by the British neuroscientist Karl
Friston.
A helpful way to think about active inference is as a kind of selffulfilling perceptual prediction, a process by which the brain seeks out,
through making actions, the sensory data that makes its perceptual
predictions come true. These actions can be as simple as moving one’s
eyes. This morning I was looking for my car keys amid the usual clutter
on my desk. As my eyes were darting from place to place, not only were
my moment-to-moment visual predictions being updated (empty mug,
empty mug, paperclips, empty mug …) but my visual focus was
continually interrogating the scene before me until the perceptual
prediction of car keys was fulfilled.
Any kind of bodily action will change sensory data in some way,
whether it’s moving your eyes, walking into a different room, or
tightening your stomach muscles. Even high-level ‘actions’, like
applying for a new job or deciding to get married, will cascade down into
sets of bodily actions which alter sensory inputs. Every kind of action has
the potential to suppress sensory prediction errors through active
inference, and so every kind of action directly participates in perception.

Like all aspects of predictive processing, active inference depends on
generative modelling. More specifically, active inference relies on the
ability of generative models to predict the sensory consequences of
actions. These are predictions of the form ‘if I look over there, what
sensory data am I likely to encounter?’ Such predictions are called
conditional predictions – predictions about what would happen were
something to be the case. Without conditional predictions of this kind,
there would be no way for the brain to know which action, among
countless possible actions, would be most likely to reduce sensory
prediction errors. The actions my brain predicted as being most likely to
locate my missing car keys involved visually scanning my desk, not
staring out of the window or waving my hands in the air.
As well as fulfilling existing perceptual predictions, active inference
can also help improve these predictions. Over short timescales, actions
can harvest new sensory data to help make a better best guess, or to
decide between competing perceptual hypotheses. We saw an example of
this at the top of this chapter, where the competing hypotheses of
‘overnight rain’ and ‘accidentally left the sprinkler on’ could be better
discriminated by peeking over the fence at your neighbour’s lawn.
Another example would be tidying away all the mugs on my desk in
order to help find my car keys. In each case, choosing the relevant action
relies on having a generative model able to predict how sensory data
would change as a result of that action.
In the long run, actions are fundamental to learning – which here
means improving the brain’s generative models by revealing more about
the causes of sensory signals, and about the causal structure of the world
in general. When I look over the fence to help me infer the causes of a
specific wet lawn, I’ve also learned more about what causes wet lawns in
general. In the best case, active inference can give rise to a virtuous circle
in which well-chosen actions uncover useful information about the
structure of the world, which is then incorporated into improved
generative models, which can then enable improved perceptual inference
and direct new actions predicted to deliver even more useful information.
The most counterintuitive aspect of active inference is that action
itself can be thought of as a form of self-fulfilling perceptual prediction.
In this view, actions do not merely participate in perception – actions are
perceptions. When I move my eyes to look for my car keys, or my hands

to tidy the mugs away, what’s happening is that perceptual predictions
about the position and movement of my body are making themselves
come true.
In active inference, actions are self-fulfilling proprioceptive
predictions. Proprioception is a form of perception which keeps track of
where the body is and how it is moving, by registering sensory signals
that flow from receptors situated all over the skeleton and musculature.
We probably don’t think much about proprioception because, in some
sense, it’s always there, but the simple fact that you can touch your nose
with your eyes shut – try it! – demonstrates the essential role it plays in
all our actions. From the perspective of active inference, touching my
nose means allowing a suite of proprioceptive predictions about hand
movement and position to become self-fulfilling – to overwhelm the
sensory evidence that my fingers are currently not touching my nose.
Precision weighting again plays an important role here. In order for
proprioceptive predictions to make themselves come true, the prediction
errors that are telling the brain where the body actually is must be
attenuated, or down-weighted. This can be thought of as the opposite of
paying attention – a kind of ‘disattention’ to the body, which allows it to
move.
Thinking about action in this way underlines how action and
perception are two sides of the same coin. Rather than perception being
the input and action being the output with respect to some central ‘mind’,
action and perception are both forms of brain-based prediction. Both
depend on a common process of Bayesian best guessing, on a carefully
choreographed dance between perceptual predictions and sensory
prediction errors, just with differences in who leads and who follows.
—
Let’s check in one final time with our imagined brain, sealed inside its
bony prison. We now know that this brain is far from isolated. It swims in
a torrent of sensory signals from the world and the body, continually
directing actions – self-fulfilling proprioceptive predictions – which
proactively sculpt this sensory flow. The incoming sensory barrage is met
by a cascade of top-down predictions, with prediction error signals
streaming upward to stimulate ever better predictions and elicit new

actions. This rolling process gives rise to an approximation to Bayesian
inference, a GoodEnough Bayesianism in which the brain settles and
resettles on its evolving best guess about the causes of its sensory
environment, and a vivid perceptual world – a controlled hallucination –
is brought into being.
Understanding controlled hallucinations this way, we now have good
reasons to recognise that top-down predictions do not merely bias our
perception. They are what we perceive. Our perceptual world alive with
colours, shapes, and sounds is nothing more and nothing less than our
brain’s best guess of the hidden causes of its colourless, shapeless, and
soundless sensory inputs.
And as we’ll see next, it’s not only experiences of cats, coffee cups,
and gorillas that can be explained this way – but every aspect of our
perceptual experience.
Notes
The Wizard of Odds: Thanks again to Baba Brinkman, who inspired this title. It comes from his
Rap Guide to Consciousness (2018), for which I was a scientific advisor. See
https://bababrinkman.com/shows/#consciousness.
the lawn is wet: This example is adapted from F. V. Jensen (2000). For a thorough grounding in
abductive reasoning, you can do no better than Peter Lipton’s Inference to the Best
Explanation (2004).
The rule itself: Here’s how Bayes’ rule is normally written:
⋅

p(D|H ) p(H )

p (H |D) =

p(D)

p(H|D) is the posterior – the probability of the hypothesis H given the data D, p(D|H)
is the likelihood – the probability of the data given the hypothesis, and p(H) and p(D)
are the prior probabilities of the hypothesis and the data, respectively. Note that
coming up with a number for p(D) can be difficult, but fortunately it is often not
necessary. When the goal is to find the most likely posterior among a range of
alternatives, as it often is, the p(D)s nicely cancel out.
wrongly conclude that you have a nasty disease: In 2009 the US government advised against mass
mammographic breast cancer screening of women in their forties for exactly this reason.
Mammograms at that time had about 80 per cent sensitivity, which means they detected about
80 per cent of women in this age group who had breast cancer when they were screened. But
the tests also flagged cancer in about 10 per cent of women who did not have the disease at the
time. Critically, breast cancer has a low incidence – or ‘base rate’ – of about 0.04 per cent in
this age group. Applying Bayes’ rule, using this base rate as the prior, we can calculate that the
probability of having breast cancer given a positive mammogram is only about 3 per cent. Out
of every 100 women testing positive, 97 will be cancer-free, and will undergo needless anxiety
as well as potentially expensive and invasive additional investigation. One moral from this
story is to improve the sensitivity and specificity of testing, and mammograms are indeed

much better than they were. A recent UK study has suggested that screening women in their
forties could now be worthwhile. See McGrayne (2012); Duffy et al. (2020).
Bayesian inference has been applied: The surprisingly controversial history of Bayesian analysis
is beautifully recounted in Sharon McGrayne’s The Theory That Would Not Die (2012).
In the philosophy of science: For more on this see Lakatos (1978) and Seth (2015b).
overturn my Bayesian belief: Hat tip to Paul Fletcher and Chris Frith, who made the same point
about their Bayesian theory of hallucination and delusion in schizophrenia (Fletcher & Frith,
2009).
something has to happen: Strictly, X is a random variable because its value is determined by a
probability distribution. The example in the figure on p. 103 is a continuous probability
distribution (also called a probability density function), since X can take any value within the
allowed range. If X could only take specific values – for example ‘heads’ or ‘tails’ – we would
have a discrete probability distribution.
the confidence the brain has in this probability estimate: There are two ways to interpret
mappings between Bayesian beliefs and the brain. The weaker version is that we, as external
observers, use these beliefs to represent things to us, just as we might use a physical map to
represent our surroundings. On this view, observed neural activity might represent certain
states-of-affairs to us, as scientists. The stronger interpretation is that the brain uses these
beliefs (or something like them) to represent things to itself. This second interpretation
exemplifies the ‘Bayesian brain’ hypothesis and is central to the idea of the brain as a
prediction machine. Failure to distinguish these two meanings of ‘representation’ has been the
source of much confusion throughout cognitive science and neuroscience. See Harvey (2008).
all the top-down predictions: Some people refer to the bottom-up and top-down pathways as,
respectively, ‘feedforward’ and ‘feedback’. From the perspective of predictive processing, this
is the wrong way around. In engineering, ‘feedback’ is usually associated with an error signal
which is used to adjust the ‘feedforward’ control signal. Therefore, in predictive processing,
the bottom-up connections are now the ‘feedback’ connections, because these connections
convey the error signals. Complicating matters further, as mentioned earlier, some (global,
stable) predictions may be embedded in bottom-up signals, with top-down connections now
conveying prediction errors (Teufel & Fletcher, 2020).
predictive processing: I use predictive processing in this book as a shorthand for a variety of
theories, including but not limited to predictive coding, which include the core mechanism of
prediction error minimisation. In doing so I do not mean to diminish their differences, which
are interesting and important (Hohwy, 2020a).
tries to minimise these errors: In Bayesian terms, a generative model is specified by a
combination of a prior and a likelihood. Think of it as ‘the joint probability of the hypothesis
and the data together’, p(H, D). Putting things this way mathematically underwrites the claim
that prediction error minimisation approximates Bayesian inference (Buckley et al., 2017).
cascade further down: Hierarchical prediction error minimisation suggests that the parts of the
brain involved in perception should be richly endowed with top-down connectivity conveying
signals from higher hierarchical levels to lower levels. Many studies have shown this to be the
case; see for example Markov et al. (2014). The presence of such rich top-down connectivity is
harder to explain from a bottom-up perspective on perception.
as if from thin air: See Kuhn et al. (2008) for a review of psychology and magic.
precision weighting: See Feldman & Friston (2010). Precision weighting is achieved by altering
priors on precisions – so-called hyperpriors – so that the inferred precision is increased or
decreased.
video demonstration: See also Simons & Chabris (1999).

to act effectively: My University of Sussex colleague Andy Clark has long championed ‘actionoriented’ formulations of predictive processing. His 2016 book Surfing Uncertainty (2016) is a
landmark resource.
generating actions: As the neuroscientist György Buzsáki argues in his book The Brain from
Inside Out, this perspective poses challenges, and opens new opportunities, for experimental
neuroscience. Most experimentalists, though by no means all, study the brain by examining its
activity in response to external stimulation, rather than as an intrinsically dynamic, active
system. See Buzsáki (2019), and also Brembs (2020).
active inference: Friston et al. (2010)
virtuous circle: Alexander Tschantz, Christopher Buckley, Beren Millidge and I have been
developing new machine learning algorithms on this basis which are able to learn generative
models from small amounts of data (Tschantz et al., 2020a). Interestingly, the possibility of
‘bottom-up’ predictions (Teufel & Fletcher, 2020) has a promising application in this context.
It can be related to the powerful technique of ‘amortisation’ in machine learning, where an
approximate Bayesian posterior is computed through a feedforward (bottom-up) sweep
through an appropriately trained artificial neural network.
disattention: This idea can be experimentally tested, and it indeed turns out that during action,
proprioceptive sensory sensitivity is reduced, just as would be expected (C. E. Palmer et al.,
2016). The sensory attenuation accompanying action also provides a neat explanation for why
we can’t tickle ourselves (H. Brown et al., 2013).
*
†
‡

Sometimes the term variance is used instead of precision. Precision is the inverse of
variance: the higher the precision, the lower the variance.
www.youtube.com/watch?v=vJG698U2Mvo.
Consider the sea squirt. In its juvenile stage this simple animal has a well-defined though
rudimentary brain, which it uses as it searches for an appealing rock or lump of coral on
which to spend the rest of its life filter-feeding on whatever drifts by. Having found one
and attached itself, it digests its own brain, retaining only a simple nervous system. Some
people have used the sea squirt as an analogy for an academic career, before and after
finding a permanent university position.

6
The Beholder’s Share
Our journey into the deep structure of perceptual experience starts with a
trip to Vienna, at the turn of the twentieth century. If you’d lingered in
this elegant city’s cafes, salons, and opium dens during these years, you
might have run into some notable characters. There was the Vienna
Circle of philosophers, a group that included Kurt Gödel, Rudolf Carnap,
and from time to time Ludwig Wittgenstein. There were the pioneers of
modernist painting, Gustav Klimt, Oskar Kokoschka, and Egon Schiele,
as well as the art historian Alois Riegl. And of course there was Sigmund
Freud.
In the fluid intellectual atmosphere of Vienna at that time, the two
cultures of art and science mingled to an unusual degree. Science wasn’t
placed above art, in the all too familiar sense in which art, and the human
responses it evokes, are considered to be things in need of scientific
explanation. Nor did art place itself beyond the reach of science. Artists
and scientists – and their critics – were allies in their attempts to
understand human experience in all its richness and variety. No wonder
the neuroscientist Eric Kandel called this period ‘the age of insight’, in
his book of the same name.
One of the most influential ideas emerging from the age of insight is
the ‘beholder’s share’, first introduced by Riegl and later popularised by
one of the major figures in twentieth-century art history, Ernst Gombrich
– himself born in Vienna in 1909. Their idea highlighted the role played
by the observer – the beholder – in imaginatively ‘completing’ a work of
art. The beholder’s share is that part of perceptual experience that is
contributed by the perceiver and which is not to be found in the artwork –
or the world – itself.
The concept of the beholder’s share cries out to be connected with
predictive theories of perception – like the controlled hallucination
theory. As Kandel put it: ‘The insight that the beholder’s perception
involves a top-down inference convinced Gombrich that there is no

“innocent eye”: that is, all visual perception is based on classifying
concepts and interpreting visual information. One cannot perceive that
which one cannot classify.’
For me, the beholder’s share is particularly evident when in the
company of artists like Claude Monet, Paul Cézanne, and Camille
Pissarro. Standing in front of one of their Impressionist masterpieces –
such as Pissarro’s Hoarfrost at Ennery, painted in 1873 and now hanging
in the Musée d’Orsay in Paris – I am drawn into a different world. One of
the reasons paintings like this gain their power is because of the space
they leave for the observer’s visual system to perform its interpretative
work. In Pissarro’s painting, ‘palette-scrapings … on a dirty canvas’ – as
the critic Louis Leroy put it – powerfully evoke the perceptual
impression of a sharply frosted field.
Impressionist landscapes attempt to remove the artist from the act of
painting, to recover Gombrich’s ‘innocent eye’ by imparting to the
canvas the variations in brightness that are the raw materials for
perceptual inference, rather than the output of this process. To do this, the
artist must develop and deploy a sophisticated understanding of how the
subjective, phenomenological aspects of vision come about. Each work
can be understood as an exercise in reverse engineering the human visual
system, from sensory input all the way to a coherent subjective
experience. The paintings become experiments into predictive perception
and into the nature of the conscious experiences that these processes give
rise to.
Paintings like Pissarro’s are more than echoes or presentiments of a
science of perception, and the beholder’s share offers more than an arthistorical version of prediction error minimisation. What Gombrich and
company bring to the table is a deep appreciation of the
phenomenological, experiential nature of perception – an appreciation
that is easily lost amid the nuts and bolts of priors and likelihoods and
prediction errors.
‘When we say the blots and brushstrokes of the Impressionist canvas
“suddenly come to life”, we mean we have been led to project a
landscape into these dabs of pigment.’ Here, Gombrich captures
something essential about conscious perception, something that applies
beyond art to the nature of experience in general. When we experience
the world as being ‘really out there’, this is not a passive revealing of an

objective reality, but a vivid and present projection – a reaching out to the
world from the brain.
—
Back in the lab, efforts to unravel the ways in which perceptual
expectations underpin subjective experience start with simple
experiments. One experimental prediction is that we should perceive
things we expect more quickly, and more easily, than things we don’t
expect. A few years ago, Yair Pinto – then a postdoctoral researcher with
me, and now an assistant professor at the University of Amsterdam – set
out to test this hypothesis, focusing as we often do on visual experience.
Yair used a set-up called ‘continuous flash suppression’ in which
different images are presented to the left and right eyes. One eye is
presented with a picture – in this case either a house or a face – while the
other eye is presented with a rapidly changing pattern of overlapping
oblongs. When the brain tries to fuse the two images into a single scene,
it fails, and the changing oblongs tend to dominate, so that’s what the
person consciously sees. Conscious perception of the picture is
suppressed by the ‘continuous flashing’ shapes. Our experiment –
illustrated below – used a version of this method in which the contrast of
the oblongs started high and diminished over time, while that of the
picture started low and increased. This meant that after a few seconds at
most, the picture – either a house or a face – became consciously visible.

Fig. 10: Continuous flash suppression
with ramping contrast.*

To discover how perceptual expectations affected conscious
perception, we cued participants with either the word ‘house’ or the word
‘face’ before each experimental trial. Importantly, these expectations
were only partially valid. When participants were cued with the word
‘face’, a face would be present on 70 per cent of trials, but on the other
30 per cent a house would be present. The reverse was true when we led
them to expect a house. By measuring how long it took for each image to
emerge from flash suppression, we could determine how quickly people
consciously saw a particular image – a house or a face – when it was
expected, compared to when it was unexpected.
As we had predicted, people were faster and more accurate at seeing
houses when houses were what they were expecting – and the same for
faces. The difference in speed was small – about one tenth of a second –
but it was reliable. In our experiment, valid perceptual expectations do
indeed lead to more rapid and more accurate conscious perceptions.
Our study is one among a growing number that have looked into what
happens when perceptual expectations are at work. In another elegant
experiment, Micha Heilbron, Floris de Lange, and their colleagues at the
Donders Institute in Nijmegen took advantage of the so-called ‘word
superiority effect’. Single letters – like ‘U’ – are easier to identify when
they form part of a word, such as ‘HOUSE’, than when they are part of a

nonword letter string, such as ‘AEUVR’. De Lange’s team showed
volunteers many examples of words and nonwords, always presented
against visually noisy backgrounds. Confirming the word superiority
effect, they found that individual letters were easier to read in the word
condition than in the nonword condition.
The twist in this study came from a clever way of analysing the
volunteers’ brain activity, which they had recorded using fMRI. By
analysing the data using a powerful technique called ‘brain reading’, they
found that the neural signature of a letter in the visual cortex was
‘sharper’ – by which I mean more distinguishable from neural
representations of other letters – when the letter formed part of a word
than when it was part of a nonword. This means that perceptual
expectations provided by the word context are able to alter activity at
early stages of visual processing in a way that enhances perception, just
as the controlled hallucination view suggests should happen.
As illuminating as experiments like these are, laboratory
environments still fall far short of the richness and variety of conscious
experiences out there in the wild. To get out of the lab and into the world,
we need to think differently.
—
One summer day, not so long ago and for the first time in my life, I
placed a tiny amount of LSD under my tongue and lay back in the grass
to see what would happen. It was a warm day with a gentle breeze and a
pale blue sky scattered with wisps of cloud. After half an hour or so, just
as happened to Albert Hofmann all those years before, the world started
to shift and mutate. The hills and sky and clouds and sea started to pulse,
becoming more vivid, deeply entrancing, entwined and interwoven with
my body, somehow almost alive. Like a proper scientist, I was trying to
take notes, but looking at them over the next day, I saw that my attempts
had tailed off rather quickly. One memory that has stayed with me is how
the clouds took on shifting but definite forms, in a way that seemed at
least partially under my control. Once a particular cloud began by itself
to resemble a horse – or a cat, or a person – I found that without much
effort I could accentuate the effect, sometimes to absurd degrees. At one
point a procession of Cilla Blacks promenaded across the horizon.†

For anyone who doubts that the brain is the organ of experience, the
hallucinations produced through LSD deliver a powerful corrective. For
several days afterwards I had the impression I could still see ‘through’
my perceptual experiences, experiencing them – at least partially – as the
constructions they are. I could still experience echoes of the medium,
along with the perceptual message.
Of course, it’s possible to see faces in clouds without a
pharmaceutical boost – at least to see their hints and suggestions, their
probabilistic shadows projected onto and into the sky. The general
phenomenon of seeing patterns in things is called pareidolia (from the
Greek ‘alongside’ and ‘image’). For humans – and some other animals –
the significance of faces means that our brains come preloaded with
strong face-related prior expectations. This is why we all tend to see
faces in things, to some degree, whether in clouds, pieces of toast, or
even old bathroom sinks – as in the image below. And because we all do
it, we typically don’t think of pareidolia as hallucination. When a
schizophrenic hears a voice commanding him to do violence to himself,
or telling him that he is Jesus reborn, and when nobody else hears this
voice, things are different and we call it hallucination. When on LSD I
see Cilla Blacks marching across the sky, that too is hallucination.

Fig. 11: Seeing a face in a sink.

As we now know, it would be a mistake to think of any of these
phenomena – however bizarre they may appear – as wholly distinct from
the normal business of perceptual best guessing. All our experiences,
whether we label them hallucinatory or not, are always and everywhere
grounded in a projection of perceptual expectations onto and into our
sensory environment. What we call ‘hallucination’ is what happens when
perceptual priors are unusually strong, overwhelming the sensory data so
that the brain’s grip on their causes in the world starts to slide.
Inspired by this continuity between normal perception and
hallucination, in our lab we’ve been exploring new ways of studying how
perceptual best guessing gives rise to perceptual experience, and our
experiments have taken us to some strange places.
Starting from my office, if you go up two flights of stairs and wend
your way through the bowels of the old chemistry department, you’ll find
one of our makeshift laboratory spaces – its location and purpose
revealed by a piece of paper stuck to the door with blu-tack: ‘VR/AR
lab’. Here, we use the rapidly developing technologies of virtual and
augmented reality (VR/AR) to investigate the perception of the world
and of the self in ways otherwise not possible. A few years ago, we
decided to build a ‘hallucination machine’ to see whether we could
generate hallucination-like experiences in an experimentally controllable
way, by simulating overactive perceptual priors. The project was led by
Keisuke Suzuki, a senior postdoctoral researcher in the lab and our
resident VR expert.
Using a 360-degree video camera, we first recorded panoramic
footage of a real-world environment. We chose the main square of the
university campus on Tuesday lunchtime, when students and staff mill
around the weekly pop-up food market. We then processed the footage
through an algorithm that Keisuke designed, which was based on
Google’s ‘deep dream’ procedure, in order to generate a simulated
hallucination.
The ‘deep dream’ algorithm involves taking an artificial neural
network that has been trained to recognise objects in images, and running
it backwards. Networks like this consist of many layers of simulated
neurons, with the connections arranged so that it resembles, in some
ways, the bottom-up pathway through a biological visual system.
Because these networks contain only bottom-up connections, they are

easy to train using standard machine learning methods. The particular
network we used had been trained to identify more than a thousand
different kinds of object within images, including many different breeds
of dog. It does an excellent job, even distinguishing between different
varieties of husky, which all look the same to me.
The standard way these networks are used is to present them with an
image and then ask what the network ‘thinks’ is in the image. The deep
dream algorithm reverses the procedure, telling the network that a
particular object is present, and updating the image instead. In other
words, the algorithm is projecting a perceptual prediction onto and into
an image, giving it an excess of the beholder’s share. For the
hallucination machine, we applied this process frame by frame to the
entire panoramic video, and added a few bells and whistles to cope with
image continuity and so on. We replayed the deep-dreamed movie
through a head-mounted display, so people could look around and
experience it in an immersive way, and the hallucination machine was
born.
When I first tried it out, the experience was much more compelling
than I’d anticipated. While it wasn’t anything like a full-blown acid trip
or psychotic hallucination (as far as I know), the world was nevertheless
substantially transformed. There were no Cilla Blacks, but this time dogs,
and dog parts, were organically emerging out of all parts of the scene
around me in a way that seemed entirely different from just pasting dog
pictures onto a pre-existing movie (see the image overleaf for a blackand-white still). The power of the hallucination machine lies in its ability
to simulate the effects of top-down best guesses that dogs are present,
and in doing so to recapitulate in an exaggerated fashion the process by
which we perceive and interpret visual scenes in the real world.

Fig. 12: Still from a ‘hallucination machine’ video.

By programming the hallucination machine in slightly different ways,
we can generate different kinds of simulated hallucinatory experience.
For example, if we fix the activity in one of the middle layers of the
network – rather than in the output layer – we end up with hallucinations
of object parts, rather than of whole objects. In this case, the scene before
you becomes suffused with eyes and ears and legs, a jumbled morass of
dog parts pervading the entirety of your visual world. And fixing even
lower layers leads to what are best described as ‘geometric’
hallucinations, in which low-level features of the visual environment –
edges, lines, textures, patterns – become unusually vivid and prominent.
The hallucination machine is an exercise in what we might call
‘computational phenomenology’: the use of computational models to
build explanatory bridges from mechanisms to properties of perceptual
experience. Its immediate value lies in matching the computational
architecture of predictive perception to the phenomenology of
hallucination. This way, we can start to understand why specific kinds of
hallucination are the way they are. But beyond this application lies the
deeper, and for me more interesting claim that by shedding light on

hallucinations, we will be better able to understand normal, everyday
perceptual experience as well. The hallucination machine makes clear, in
a personal, immediate and vivid way, that what we call hallucination is a
form of uncontrolled perception. And that normal perception – in the
here and now – is indeed a form of controlled hallucination.
—
One might worry that the controlled hallucination view is limited to
explaining things like: ‘I see a table because that’s my brain’s best guess
of the causes of current sensory input.’ (Or instead of table: face, cat,
dog, red chair, brother-in-law, avocado, Cilla Black.) I think we can go
much further, to account for what I like to call the ‘deep structure’ of
perception – the ways in which conscious contents appear in our
experience, in time and in space and across different modalities.
Take the apparently trivial observation that our visual world is
comprised largely of objects and the spaces between them. When I look
at the coffee cup on my desk, in some sense I perceive its back, even
though I cannot directly see this part of it. The cup appears to me to
occupy a definite volume, whereas a coffee cup in a photograph or
drawing does not. This is the phenomenology of ‘objecthood’.
Objecthood is a property of how visual conscious contents generally
appear, rather than being a property of any single conscious experience.
Although objecthood is a pervasive feature of visual experience, it is
not universal. If on a sunny day you look up at a uniform expanse of blue
sky, you do not have the impression of the sky being an ‘object out
there’. And if you glance directly at the sun and then look away, the
retinal afterimage seared into your vision is experienced not as an object,
but as a temporary glitch. Similar distinctions apply in other modalities:
people suffering from tinnitus do not experience the distressing sounds as
relating to really existing things in the world, which is why it’s
sometimes called ‘ringing in the ears’.
Artists have long recognised the relevance of objecthood for human
perception. René Magritte’s ubiquitous The Treachery of Images
(opposite) explores the difference between an object and an image of an
object. A large part of Pablo Picasso’s Cubist portfolio investigates how
our perception of objecthood depends on our first-person perspective. His

paintings break down and rearrange objects in multiple ways,
representing them from several perspectives at once. We can think of
these paintings, and others like them, as exploring the principles of
objecthood from the perspective of the beholder’s share. Picasso’s work
in particular draws the observer into imaginatively creating perceptual
objects out of a jumble of possibilities. As the philosopher Maurice
Merleau-Ponty put it, the painter investigates through painting the means
by which an object makes itself visible to our eyes.
In cognitive science, the phenomenology of objecthood has been most
thoroughly explored by ‘sensorimotor contingency theory’. According to
this theory, what we experience depends on a ‘practical mastery’ of how
actions change sensory inputs. When we perceive something, the content
of what we perceive is not carried by the sensory signals; instead it
emerges from the brain’s implicit knowledge about how actions and
sensations are coupled. On this view, vision – and all our perceptual
modalities – are things an organism does, not passive information feeds
for a centralised ‘mind’.

Fig. 13: René Magritte, The Treachery of Images (1929).
© ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2021.

In chapter 4, we described the experience of redness in terms of brainbased predictions about how surfaces reflect light. Let’s now extend this

explanation to objecthood. If I hold a tomato in front of me, I perceive
the tomato as having a back, in exactly the way that doesn’t happen when
I look at a picture of a tomato (or a picture of a pipe, as in Magritte’s
painting), or a clear blue sky, or when I experience a retinal afterimage.
According to sensorimotor contingency theory, I become perceptually
aware of the back of the tomato, even though I cannot directly see it,
because of implicit knowledge, wired into my brain, about how rotating a
tomato will change incoming sensory signals.
The necessary wiring comes in the form of a generative model. As we
know from the previous chapter, generative models can predict the
sensory consequences of actions. These predictions are ‘conditional’ or
‘counterfactual’ in the sense that they are about what could happen or
what could have happened to sensory signals, given some specific action.
In a research paper I wrote a few years ago, I proposed that the
phenomenology of objecthood depends on the richness of these
conditional or counterfactual predictions. Generative models that encode
many different predictions of this kind, such as a tomato having red skin
all the way around, will lead to a strong phenomenology of objecthood.
But generative models that encode only a few or no such predictions,
such as for a featureless blue sky or for a retinal afterimage, will lead to
weak or absent objecthood.
Another situation where objecthood is typically absent is in
‘grapheme-colour synaesthesia’. The term synaesthesia refers to a kind of
‘mixing of the senses’. People with the grapheme-colour variety have
experiences of colour when seeing letters: for example, the letter A may
elicit a luminous redness, regardless of its actual colour on the page.
Although these colour experiences happen consistently and automatically
– meaning that the same colour is experienced whenever a particular
letter is encountered, and that no conscious effort is needed for this to
happen – synaesthetes do not normally confuse their synaesthetic colours
with real ‘out there in the world’ colours. I think this is because
synaesthetic colours, when compared to ‘real’ colours, do not support a
rich repertoire of sensorimotor predictions. A synaesthetic ‘red’ does not
vary much as you move around, or as the ambient lighting changes, and
so there won’t be any phenomenology of objecthood.
In our VR lab, we’ve started to put some of these ideas to the test. In
one recent experiment, we created a range of deliberately unfamiliar

virtual objects, each defined by a variety of blobs and protrusions, which
participants viewed through a head-mounted display (see below). We
adapted the flash suppression method used in our previous face/house
experiment so that each object was initially invisible but eventually broke
through into consciousness. Whereas the face/house experiment had
manipulated whether a particular image was expected or not, our VR setup allowed us instead to manipulate the validity of sensorimotor
predictions by changing the way the objects responded to actions.
Participants used a joystick to rotate the virtual objects, and we could
make them respond either as a real object would, or by revolving in
random, unpredictable directions. We predicted that normally behaving
virtual objects would break through into consciousness sooner than those
that violated sensorimotor predictions, and this is precisely what we
found. This experiment is admittedly imperfect because it takes the speed
of access to conscious perception as a proxy for the phenomenology of
objecthood. But it still shows that the validity of sensorimotor predictions
can affect conscious perception in specific and measurable ways.

Fig. 14: Some virtual objects, designed to look unfamiliar.

—
Among the many intuitive but false ideas about perception is that
changes in what we perceive correspond directly to changes in the world.
But change, like objecthood, is another manifestation of the deep
structure of perceptual experience. Change in perception is not simply
given by change in sensory data. We perceive change through the same
principles of best guessing that give rise to all other aspects of
perception.
Many experiments have shown that physical change – change in the
world – is neither necessary nor sufficient for the perception of change.
The snake-filled image below provides a striking example in which

nothing is moving, yet there can be a perceptual impression of
movement, especially if you let your eyes rove around the image. What’s
happening is that the fine details of the picture, when seen in the
periphery of your vision – out of the corner of your eye – convince your
visual cortex to infer motion even though no motion is present.

Fig. 15: ‘Rotating snakes’ illusion.‡
Credit: Akiyoshi Kitaoka.

The opposite situation, physical change without perceptual change,
happens in ‘change blindness’. This can occur when some aspects of an
environment change very slowly, or when everything is changing at once
with only some features being relevant. In one powerful video example
of this phenomenon,§ the entire lower half of an image can change colour
– from red to purple – but because it happens slowly, over about forty
seconds, most people don’t notice the change at all, even if they are
looking directly at the changing part of the image. (This only works when
people have not been primed to expect the colour change. If they are
actively looking for it, the change is easy to see.) This example has some
similarity to inattentional blindness, which I described in the previous
chapter, where people fail to see an unexpected gorilla in the midst of a

basketball game. The difference here is that what people are failing to see
is ‘change’ itself.
Some people think that change blindness exposes a philosophical
dilemma: after the image has changed colour, are you still experiencing
red (even though it’s now purple), or are you now experiencing purple, in
which case what were you experiencing before, given that you didn’t
experience any change? The resolution is to deny the premise of the
question and to recognise that perception of change is not the same as
change of perception. The experience of change is another perceptual
inference, another variety of controlled hallucination.
And if experiences of change are perceptual inferences, so too are
experiences of time.
—
Time is one of the most perplexing topics in philosophy and in physics,
as well as in neuroscience. Physicists struggle to understand what it is
and why it flows (if indeed it does flow), and the challenge for
neuroscientists is no less thorny. All our perceptual experiences happen
in time and through time. Even our experience of the present moment
seems always smeared into a relatively fixed past and a partially open
future. Time flows for us too, though sometimes it crawls along while at
other times it streaks by.
We experience seconds, hours, months, and years, but we have no
‘time sensors’ inside our brains. For vision, we have photoreceptors in
the retina; for hearing, there are ‘hair cells’ in the ear; but there is no
dedicated sensory system for time. What’s more, setting aside the
circadian rhythm, which provides us with jet lag among other things,
there is no evidence for any ‘neuronal clock’ inside the head which
measures out our experiences in time – and which would in any case be a
prime example of what Daniel Dennett called a double transduction, in
which a property of the world is re-instantiated in the brain for the benefit
of an assumed internal observer. Instead, like change, like all our
perceptions, experiences of time are controlled hallucinations too.
Controlled by what, though? Without a dedicated sensory channel,
what could provide the equivalent of sensory prediction errors? A simple
and elegant solution has been proposed by my colleague, the cognitive

scientist Warrick Roseboom, who joined our Centre in 2015 and who
now leads his own research group focused on time perception. His idea is
that we infer time based not on the ticking of an internal clock, but on the
rate of change of perceptual contents in other modalities – and he devised
a clever way to test it.
Led by Warrick, our team recorded a library of videos of different
durations and in different contexts – a crowded city street, an empty
office, a few cows grazing in a field near the university. We then asked
volunteers to watch these videos and judge how long each lasted. When
they did so, they all showed characteristic biases: underestimating the
duration of long videos, and overestimating short videos. They also
showed biases according to the context of each scene, rating busy scenes
as lasting longer than quiet scenes, even for videos that were objectively
of the same duration.
Warrick then showed the same videos to an artificial neural network
that mimicked the operation of the human visual system. This network
was in fact the same one we’d used in our hallucination machine. For
each video, an estimate of duration was computed, based – roughly
speaking – on the accumulated rate of change of activity within the
network. These estimates did not involve any ‘inner clock’ whatsoever.
Remarkably, the neural network estimates and the human estimates were
virtually identical, showing the same biases by duration and by context.
This shows that time perception can emerge, at least in principle, from a
‘best guess’ about the rate of change of sensory signals, without any need
for an internal pacemaker.
We’ve recently taken this research further by looking for evidence of
this process within the brain. In a study led by postdoctoral researcher
Maxine Sherman, we used fMRI to record people’s brain activity while
they watched the same set of videos and estimated their durations. We
wanted to know whether we could use activity in the visual cortex to
predict how long each video seemed, as we’d been able to do in
Warrick’s previous study using a computational model of vision. Maxine
found that we could. Brain activity in the visual system, but not in other
brain regions, neatly predicted subjective duration. This is strong
evidence that experiences of duration indeed emerge from perceptual best
guessing, and not from the ticking of any neuronal clock.

Other experiments that might have revealed an ‘inner clock’ have
failed to do so. My favourite, by a distance, involved jumping off cranes.
The neuroscientist David Eagleman set out to test the common intuition
that subjective time slows down in moments of high drama, such as in
the moments before a car crash. He reasoned that this subjective slowing
down might be due to an internal clock running faster – more ticks of the
clock in a given time period, longer perceived duration. This in turn
should lead to a ‘speeding up’ of the rate of perception since a faster
clock should mean an improved ability to perceive short durations.
To test this idea, Eagleman and his team designed a special digital
watch which displayed a series of numbers that flickered so quickly that
they were impossible to read in normal conditions. Then he persuaded
some brave volunteers to repeatedly perform scary adrenaline-loaded
leaps into the void while staring at their flickering watches. If an internal
clock was indeed speeding up, then – his reasoning went – the volunteers
should see the blur resolve into readable numbers while in freefall. They
couldn’t, so his study provided no evidence for an internal clock. Of
course, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence, but still … what
an experiment!
—
At the frontier of our research into the deep structure of perceptual
experience is a project investigating the perception of ‘reality’ itself. This
project, led by Alberto Mariola, a talented PhD student in the lab,
involves a new experimental set-up we are calling ‘substitutional reality’.
However immersive they may be, current VR environments are always
distinguishable from the real world. Volunteers in our hallucination
machine always know that what they are experiencing is not real,
however trippy things become. Substitutional reality aims to overcome
this limitation. The goal is to create a system in which people experience
their environment as being real, and believe it to be real, even though it is
not real.
The idea is simple. As with the hallucination machine we pre-record
some panoramic video footage, but this time the footage is of the interior
of the exact same VR/AR laboratory in which we conduct our
experiments. When volunteers arrive in the lab, they sit on a stool in the

middle of the room and put on a head-mounted display, which has a
camera attached to the front. They are invited to look around the room
through the camera mounted on their headset. At a certain point, we
switch the feed so that the camera displays not the live real-world scene
but the pre-recorded video. Remarkably, most people in this situation
continue to experience what they are seeing as ‘real’, even though it no
longer is.
With this set-up, we can now test ideas about the conditions in which
people experience their environment as being real, and – perhaps more
importantly – what it takes for this normally pervasive aspect of
conscious experience to break down. These situations can and do happen,
not only in cases like retinal afterimages, but also in debilitating
psychiatric disorders such as depersonalisation and derealisation, where
there can be a global loss of the experienced reality of the world, and of
the self.
The investigation of what makes perceptual experience seem ‘real’
takes us all the way back to Wittgenstein’s insight about the Copernican
revolution: that even when we understand how things are – Earth going
around the sun, perception as a controlled hallucination – in many ways
things will still seem the same way they always did. When I look at the
red chair in the corner of the room, its redness (and subjective ‘chair’ness) still seem to be really existing – veridical – properties of a mindindependent reality, rather than elaborate constructions of a best-guessing
brain.
Long ago, back in the eighteenth century, David Hume made a similar
observation about causality – another pervasive feature of the way we
experience the world. Rather than physical causality being an objective
property of the world, ready to be detected by our senses, Hume argued
that we ‘project’ causality out into the world on the basis of repeated
perception of things happening in close temporal succession. We do not
and we cannot directly observe ‘causality’ in the world. Yes, things
happen in the world, but what we experience as causality is a perceptual
inference, in the same way that all our perceptions are projections of our
brain’s structured expectations onto and into our sensory environment –
exercises in the beholder’s share. As Hume put it, the mind has a great
propensity to spread itself out into the world so that we ‘gild and stain’
natural objects ‘with the colours borrowed from internal sentiment’. And

it’s not just colours: shapes, smells, chairness, changes, durations, and
causality too – all the foreground and the background features of our
perceptual worlds – all are Humean projections, aspects of a controlled
hallucination.
Why do we experience our perceptual constructions as being
objectively real? On the controlled hallucination view, the purpose of
perception is to guide action and behaviour – to promote the organism’s
prospects of survival. We perceive the world not as it is, but as it is useful
for us. It therefore makes sense that phenomenological properties – like
redness, chairness, Cilla Black-ness, and causality-ness – seem to be
objective, veridical, properties of an external existing environment. We
can respond more quickly and more effectively to something happening
in the world if we perceive that thing as really existing. The out-thereness inherent in our perceptual experience of the world is, I believe, a
necessary feature of a generative model that is able to anticipate its
incoming sensory flow, in order to successfully guide behaviour.
To put it another way, even though perceptual properties depend on
top-down generative models, we do not experience the models as
models. Rather, we perceive with and through our generative models, and
in doing so out of mere mechanism a structured world is brought forth.
—
At the start of this book I promised that following the real problem
approach will chip away at the hard problem of why and how any kind of
physical mechanism should give rise to, correspond with, or be identical
to conscious experience. Are we making progress?
We are. Starting from the principle that the brain must infer the hidden
causes of its sensory inputs, we’ve reached a new understanding of why
and how our inner universe is populated with everything from coffee
cups to colours to causality-ness – things that seem to be properties of an
external objective reality, where this seeming-to-be is itself a property of
perceptual inference. And it is precisely the property of ‘seeming to be
real’ that adds extra fuel to dualistic intuitions about how conscious
experience and the physical world relate, intuitions which in turn lead to
the idea of the hard problem. It is because our perceptions have the
phenomenological character of ‘being real’ that it is extraordinarily

difficult to appreciate that, in fact, perceptual experiences do not
necessarily – or ever – directly correspond to things that have a mindindependent existence. A chair has a mind-independent existence;
chairness does not.
Once we realise this, it becomes easier to recognise the hard problem
as a less hard problem, or perhaps even a non-problem. Putting it the
other way around, the hard problem of consciousness seems especially
hard if we interpret the contents of our perceptual experience as really
existing out there in the world. Which is exactly what the
phenomenology of normal conscious perception encourages us
automatically to do.
As was the case with the study of life a century ago, the need to find a
‘special sauce’ for consciousness is receding in direct proportion to our
ability to distinguish different aspects of conscious experience, and to
account for them in terms of their underlying mechanisms. Dissolving the
hard problem is different from solving it outright, or definitively
rebutting it, but it is the best way to make progress, far better than either
venerating consciousness as a magical mystery or dismissing it as a
metaphysically illusory non-problem. And our mission gathers pace
when we consider that it is not only experiences of the world that are
perceptual constructions.
It’s time to ask who, or what, is doing all this perceiving.
Notes
age of insight: Kandel (2012).
later popularised: Gombrich (1961)
contributed by the perceiver: Seth (2019b).
As Kandel put it: Kandel (2012), p. 204.
Hoarfrost at Ennery: This example is taken from Albright (2012) as adapted in Seth (2019b). See
www.wikiart.org/en/camille-pissarro/hoarfrost-1873.
palette-scrapings: The phrase appears in Leroy’s satirical review of Impressionist art published in
Le Charivari on 25 April 1874 – a review which coined the term Impressionism.
innocent eye: Gombrich (1961).
paintings become experiments: In his later years Pissarro suffered from serious eye problems. His
fellow Impressionists Claude Monet and Edgar Degas suffered similarly. It is intriguing to
consider whether, and how, their impaired eyesight contributed to their artistic insight. While
some influence is plausible – perhaps they were more sensitive to patterns of light rather than
details of objects – a cautionary tale comes from another painter, El Greco (1541–1614). El
Greco’s works often included unnaturally elongated figures, a feature which was attributed by
some to his pronounced astigmatism. On this story, he painted elongated figures because that’s

what he saw. But psychologists correctly pointed out that by this logic he would also have seen
his canvas as elongated, cancelling out any effect of astigmatism. This sort of logical error has
been called the ‘El Greco fallacy’, and it still catches out perception researchers even today.
See Firestone (2013).
When we say: Gombrich (1961), p. 170.
the nature of experience: Gombrich’s insight was later echoed by the writer, critic, and artist John
Berger, whose influential 1972 book Ways of Seeing opened with the line ‘The relation
between what we see and what we know is never settled.’ Compared to the culturally
conservative Gombrich, Berger emphasised the political and cultural influences on perception,
highlighting how what we see may differ among people and between groups (Berger, 1972).
One experimental prediction: In fact, this prediction is not all that straightforward; see Press et al.
(2020).
continuous flash suppression: This is a variant of the better known method of ‘binocular rivalry’
which I described in chapter 1 (Blake et al., 2014).
our experiment: Pinto et al. (2015). Our study was more complicated than summarised here. We
ran a large number of control studies to rule out, as best we could, other factors like biases in
how people make responses, or in how they focus their attention, in accounting for our results.
See de Lange et al. (2018) for a review of other, similar studies, and Melloni et al. (2011) for
an influential early contribution to this literature.
powerful technique: ‘Brain reading’ involves training machine learning algorithms to classify
brain activity into different categories. See Heilbron et al. (2020).
see faces in things: www.boredpanda.com/objects-with-faces.
build a ‘hallucination machine’: Suzuki et al. (2017).
Networks like this: Specifically, the networks are deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs)
which can be trained using standard backpropagation algorithms. See Richards et al. (2019).
reverses the procedure: In the standard ‘forward’ mode, an image is presented to the network,
activity is propagated upwards through the layers, and the network’s output tells us what it
‘thinks’ is in the image. In the deep dream algorithm – and in Keisuke’s adaptation – this
process is reversed. We fix the network output and adjust the input until the network settles
into a stable state. See Suzuki et al. (2017) for details.
much more compelling: The full hallucination machine experience – in which a panoramic video
is viewed through a head-mounted display – is considerably more immersive than any still
image. Sample movie footage is here: www.youtube.com/watch?v=TlMBnCrZZYY.
are the way they are: When these computational models map onto hypotheses about neural
circuits, this approach can be called ‘computational neuro phenomenology’ – a
computationally boosted version of the neurophenomenology that traces back to Francisco
Varela (1996). In this spirit, Keisuke Suzuki, David Schwartzman and I are developing new
versions of the hallucination machine which explicitly incorporate generative models, and
which therefore map more closely onto what we believe is happening in real brains. Our new
hallucination machines are able to capture a much wider variety of hallucinatory experience
than the original.
exploring the principles of objecthood: Seth (2019b).
the painter investigates: Merleau-Ponty (1964).
sensorimotor contingency theory: See O’Regan (2011); O’Regan & Noë (2001). Like all theories
this builds on a great deal of prior work, notably in this case James Gibson’s ideas about how
perception depends on embodied action, as well the philosophical phenomenology of Edmund
Husserl and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. Gibson’s notion of ‘affordances’ – which we’ll meet
again in chapter 9 – captures the idea that we perceive objects in terms of the possibilities for

behaviour that they afford (Gibson, 1979). Husserl proposed that ‘perception has horizons
made up of other possibilities of perception, as perceptions that we could have, if we actively
directed the course of perception otherwise’ (Husserl, 1960 [1931]). Merleau-Ponty, who was
strongly influenced by Husserl, emphasised the embodied aspects of perceptual experience,
and his 1962 Phenomenology of Perception remains influential (Merleau-Ponty, 1962).
I proposed: Seth (2014b). This is another example of ‘computational phenomenology’. See also
Cisek (2007) for a related neurophysiological theory in terms of ‘affordance competition’.
grapheme-colour synaesthesia: Seth (2014b).
one recent experiment: Suzuki et al. (2019).
snake-filled image: Another good example is provided by motion aftereffects, such as the
waterfall illusion. Stare straight at a waterfall (or at a video of a waterfall) for a while then
look away, perhaps at a rockface next to it. The rockface will appear to move upwards, while
also appearing to remain in the same place.
experiences of time are controlled hallucinations: Many time-focused neuroscientists will
disagree with this view. In fact, most psychological and neural models of time perception
assume some kind of neuronally implemented ‘pacemaker’ which serves as a benchmark
against which physical time can be compared, giving rise to perceptions of duration (van Rijn
et al., 2014). Others think that time perception depends on clock-like signals coming from the
body (heart rate and so on) – see Wittmann (2013) – but our research casts doubt on this idea
too (Suárez-Pinilla et al., 2019).
characteristic biases: The underestimation of long durations and overestimation of short durations
is an example of a ‘regression to the mean’ effect. This effect is seen in many if not all
perceptual modalities, and is a signature of Bayesian inference since the mean can be thought
of as a prior. In time perception this effect is known as Vierordt’s law.
showing the same biases: See Roseboom et al. (2019). Further support for Warrick’s idea came
from the finding that the match between the computational model and human performance was
even closer when the network input was limited to the parts of each video that a person was
looking at.
we used fMRI: Sherman et al. (2020).
My favourite: Stetson et al. (2007). There was of course a large net at the bottom of the crane, to
catch the volunteers.
substitutional reality: For an early version of this project see Suzuki et al. (2012).
we can now test ideas: Phillips et al. (2001). There are potentially important sociological
implications for this line of research. To the extent that people experience their perceptions as
being both ‘real’ and veridical, it will be difficult to accept that others might have different
perceptual experiences, even when faced with the same objective circumstances. This is one
reason why there was such a hullabaloo about The Dress (see chapter 4). People who saw it
one way simply could not accept that other ways of seeing it were possible, precisely because
they experienced their perceptions as directly revealing an objective reality. This kind of
perceptual drift – a generalisation of the echo chambers of social media – has many
implications for how we might recognise and resolve or accommodate differences between
individuals, groups, and cultures (Seth, 2019c).
As Hume put it: These quotes trace back to Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature (1738, 1.3.14.25)
and Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (1751, Appendix 1.19), as found in Kail
(2007), p. 20. I encountered the material in Dennett (2015).
we perceive with and through: Philosophers call this ‘transparency’ (Metzinger, 2003b).

*

†
‡
§

The left eye is presented with a changing pattern of oblongs that reduces in contrast over
time, while the right eye is presented with a picture (either a house or a face) that
increases in contrast over time. A mirror stereoscope is used to direct each image from a
computer monitor to the appropriate eye. Participants are cued to expect either a face or a
house by the word ‘face’ or ‘house’ being presented to both eyes at the start of each trial.
Cilla Black was a sixties-era pop star and latter-day TV celebrity from Liverpool.
For a (more effective) colour version of this illusion see
www.illusionsindex.org/i/rotating-snakes.
See www.youtube.com/watch?v=hhXZng6o6Dk.

III
SELF

7
Delirium
In the summer of 2014, my mother slipped into a vegetative state while
on the surgical emergency unit of the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
She was suffering from an undiagnosed encephalopathy – a disease of the
brain. The cause was never fully identified; she’d been admitted for
bowel cancer and the neurological problems were unexpected. I hurried
back from a conference I’d been attending in Brisbane, fearing the worst.
She recovered, slowly, but the memory of her hour-by-hour dissolution
has stayed with me. She herself remembers very little, a blessing.
Four years later, in the summer of 2018, we are in the midst of an
unlikely heatwave and another World Cup summer. This time there is no
vegetative state. Instead, my mother – now eighty-three – is suffering
from what I discover is called ‘hospital-induced delirium’, a different
kind of fragmentation of her sense of self and of the world around her.
Two weeks previously, she’d been rushed to the Radcliffe with a
recurrence of severe bowel pain. Two days after admission, while waiting
to see whether the bowel problem would resolve without surgery, she
developed intense hallucinations and delusions, and I drove up from
Brighton to be with her.
Delirium – a word surfacing from the depths of the sixteenth century
– comes from the Latin delirare, to deviate, to be deranged. The
dictionary calls it ‘an acutely disturbed state of mind characterised by
restlessness, illusions, and incoherence’. Unlike dementia, which is a
chronic and degenerative condition, delirium is usually temporary. It
waxes and wanes, though it can last for weeks. In my mind the word
evokes Victorian asylums, so it’s a surprise to hear it used diagnostically
in a twenty-first-century English hospital. But on reflection, not so much
a surprise, more another reminder of how far psychiatric medicine still
has to travel.
For my mother the dictionary definition is accurate. When I find her
on the ward she is sitting hunched in the chair, unsmiling, dishevelled,

empty-eyed. She tells me about the people she has seen crawling up the
walls, and she cannot remember where she is or why she is here. Her grip
on reality, and on who she is, is fading.
The worst of it comes on a Friday. She trusts nobody and is convinced
that there is a grand and cruel experiment being performed on her, that
we – and I include myself, since in her paranoia I am frequently the
ringmaster – are deliberately inducing these hallucinations through the
medications we insist she takes, for malign and opaque purposes.
Charming and kind in normal life, today she barks angrily at the nurses,
demands to leave the hospital, tries more than once to escape, and orders
the doctors to take her mad-scientist son away. This is not my mother.
This is a woman who looks like my mother, but who is not my mother.
The risk factors for hospital-induced delirium include epilepsy,
infection, major surgery (or a condition requiring major surgery), fever,
dehydration, lack of food and lack of sleep, side effects of medication,
and – importantly – unfamiliarity of place. All apply to my mother. The
unfamiliarity of place is why this particular delirium is ‘hospitalinduced’.
There are few places more likely to create a dissociation from the real
world than a surgical emergency unit. Constant beeps and flashing lights,
hardly any signs of the outside world – a glimpse through a window if
you’re lucky – an entire world shrunk to a bed, a chair, and maybe a
corridor. A complement of fellow travellers in varying conditions of
distress and disarray, and an ever-changing parade of similar but different
nurses, junior doctors, and consultants. Every day the same as the last.
Delirium, though a medical emergency, is not often recognised or treated
as such. Patients enter with a disease of the body and that is the target of
treatment, not any problems of the mind or brain which may develop
along the way.
Up to a third of elderly patients entering acute care develop hospitalinduced delirium, and the proportion is even higher for those having
surgery. Even though it usually recedes given time, there can be severe
long-term consequences including reduced cognitive capacity, an
increased chance of dying in the subsequent months, and heightened risk
of subsequent episodes of delirium and dementia. I take a trip out to her
village house, the same house I grew up in, to bring back familiar objects
in the hope they provide some reorientation, some flotsam for her to cling

to. A framed photograph, her spectacles, a cardigan, an old stuffed lion
from my own long-ago childhood.
Delusions are rarely random. The specifics of my mother’s particular
delirium have a twisted logic. She believes – she knows – that she is the
victim of a devious experiment that everyone is ‘in on’ and in which I am
complicit. Well, I do do experiments on people, and when I’m in the
hospital I often take on a strangely fluid identity, one part son and
another part doctor, trying to comfort her while at the same time going
through medical notes and murmuring to the consultants and junior
doctors about paraneoplastic encephalopathies and other horrid things.
The brain is always trying to find closure, to make its best guess.
Some alterations in her behaviour are quite subtle. Her sentences
emerge with each word spoken separately, rather than as a fluent stream.
‘I cannot find my glasses, I do not know where they are.’ This state
continues for many days after her primary delirium has receded. It too
waxes and wanes. This evening saw a step backwards, another
regression, deflating my hopes of getting her home soon.
My own life begins to seem unreal at the edges. I am the only close
family she has, so it’s down to me to be here for her. Mornings and
evenings are spent at the hospital, and afternoons, if I’m lucky, catching
up with work, walking, and swimming in the river Thames. On these
afternoons I head to Port Meadow, a large open grassland stocked with
geese, swans, cows, and wild horses. An improbable place even among
the layered worlds of Oxford. The heatwave has now lasted for weeks, so
that the usually muddy fields resemble an African savannah. This
morning I was chased by a horse and my heart raced as I crossed the
railway bridge back into the city.
It’s day fourteen in hospital for my mother, and day twelve for me.
Her acute confusion has passed, though she is still changed and her
condition fluctuates. Now, though, she is amazed when I tell her that she
believed I was experimenting on her, that she tried to have me taken
away. I hold her hand, tell her it will be OK, and hope that she will fully
return to her self.
But what is a ‘self’? Is it the sort of thing that can be departed from
and returned to?
The self, too, is not what it might seem to be.

Notes
Up to a third: Collier (2012).
severe long-term consequences: Davis et al. (2017).

8
Expect Yourself
It may seem as though the self – your self – is the ‘thing’ that does the
perceiving. But this is not how things are. The self is another perception,
another controlled hallucination, though of a very special kind. From the
sense of personal identity – like being a scientist, or a son – to
experiences of having a body, and of simply ‘being’ a body, the many
and varied elements of selfhood are Bayesian best guesses, designed by
evolution to keep you alive.
Let’s begin our exploration of the self with a quick trip into the future.
A century or so from now, teletransportation devices have been invented
which can create exact replicas of any human being. Just like the
machines in Star Trek, they work by scanning a person in exquisite detail
– down to the arrangement of each individual molecule – and using the
information in the scan to build a second version of that person in a
distant location, for example on Mars.
After some initial apprehension people quickly become accustomed to
this technology as an efficient means of transportation. They even get
used to the necessary feature that, once the replica is created, the original
is immediately vaporised – a procedure that had to be built in, in order to
avoid creating an explosion of identical people. From the point of view of
a traveller, let’s call her Eva, this poses no practical problem at all. After
some reassurances from the operator, Eva simply feels that she has
disappeared from place X (London) and reappeared in place Y (Mars), in
an instant.
One day, there’s a hitch. The vaporisation module in London
malfunctions and Eva – the Eva who is in London, anyway – feels like
nothing’s happened and that she’s still in the transportation facility. A
minor inconvenience. They’ll have to reboot the machine and try again,
or maybe leave it until the following day. But then a technician shuffles
into the room, carrying a gun. He mumbles something along the lines of
‘Don’t worry, you’ve been safely teletransported to Mars, just like

normal, it’s just that the regulations say that we still need to … and, look
here, you signed this consent form …’ He slowly raises his weapon and
Eva has a feeling she’s never had before, that maybe this
teletransportation malarkey isn’t quite so straightforward after all.
The point of this thought experiment, which is called the
‘teletransportation paradox’, is to unearth some of the biases most of us
have when we think about what it means to be a self.
There are two philosophical problems raised by the teletransportation
paradox. The consciousness-in-general problem is whether we can be
sure that the replica will have conscious experiences, or whether it will
be a perfectly functioning equivalent but without any inner universe. I
don’t find this problem very interesting. If the replica is created in
sufficient detail – every molecule identical! – then there’s no reason to
doubt it would be conscious, and conscious in exactly the same way as
the original. If the replica is not completely identical, then we’re back to
arguments about different kinds of philosophical zombie – and there’s no
need to go over all that again.
The more interesting problem is that of personal identity. Is the Eva
on Mars (let’s call her Eva2) the same person as Eva1 (the Eva still in
London)? It’s tempting to say, yes, she is: Eva2 would feel in every way
as Eva1 would have felt had she actually been transported
instantaneously from London to Mars. What seems to matter for this kind
of personal identity is psychological continuity, not physical continuity.*
But then if Eva1 has not been vaporised, which is the real Eva?
I think the correct – but admittedly strange – answer is that both are
the real Eva.
—
We intuitively treat experiences of self differently from experiences of
the world. When it comes to the experience of being you it seems harder
to resist the intuition that it reveals a genuine property of the way things
are – in this case an actual self – rather than a collection of perceptions.
One intuitive consequence of assuming the existence of an actual self is
that there can be only one such self, not two, or two thirds, or many.
The idea that the self is somehow indivisible, immutable,
transcendental, sui generis, is baked into the Cartesian ideal of the

immaterial soul and still carries a deep psychological resonance,
especially in Western societies. But it has also been repeatedly held up to
sceptical scrutiny by philosophers and religious practitioners, as well as
more recently by psychedelic psychonauts, medical folk, and
neuroscientists.
Kant, in his Critique of Pure Reason, argued that the concept of the
self as a ‘simple substance’ is wrong, and Hume talked about the self as a
‘bundle’ of perceptions. Much more recently, the German philosopher
Thomas Metzinger wrote a very brilliant book called Being No One – a
powerful deconstruction of the singular self. Buddhists have long argued
that there is no such thing as a permanent self and through meditation
have attempted to reach entirely selfless states of consciousness.
Ayahuasca ceremonies in South America, and increasingly elsewhere,
strip away people’s sense of self with heady mixtures of ritual and
dimethyltryptamine.
In neurology, Oliver Sacks and others have chronicled the many ways
in which the self falls apart following brain disease or damage, while
split-brain patients – who we met in chapter 3 – raise the possibility that
one self might become two. Most curious of all are craniopagus twins,
who are not only physically conjoined but also share some of their brain
structures. What could it mean to be an individual self, when it turns out
that one craniopagus twin can feel the other drinking orange juice?
Being you is not as simple as it sounds.
—
Back at the teletransportation facility, Eva1 managed to avoid the
technician’s murderous intent, and is coming to terms with her new
situation, while Eva2 remains blissfully unaware of the drama unfolding
back on Earth.
Even though both Evas were objectively and subjectively identical at
the point of replication, their identities have already started to diverge. As
with identical twins setting out on their own life journeys, the process
compounds inevitably over time. Even if Eva1 had been standing right
next to Eva2 there would have been small differences in sensory inputs
leading to subtle differences in behaviour and before you know it, Eva1

and Eva2 are experiencing different things, laying down different
memories, becoming different people.
These complexities of personal identity arise for each of us in
different ways. My mother’s identity changed dramatically during her
delirium, and though she is now recovered she seems, at least to me, both
different from and recognisably the same as who she was before – just
like the two Evas. The relationship between Eva1 and Eva2 might even
be a little bit like the relationship that holds between you now and you
ten years ago – or ten years in the future.
When it comes to who you are, or who I am – the me that is
subjectively and objectively ‘Anil Seth’ – things aren’t as simple as at
first they seem. For one thing, the sense of personal identity – the ‘I’
behind the eyes – is only one aspect of how ‘being a self’ appears in
consciousness.
Here’s how I like to break down the elements of a human self.
—
There are experiences of embodied selfhood that relate directly to the
body. These include feelings of identification with the particular object
that happens to be your body – we feel a certain sense of ownership over
our body that doesn’t apply to other objects in the world. Emotions and
moods are also aspects of embodied selfhood, as are states of arousal and
alertness. And running below these experiences we can find deeper,
formless feelings of simply being an embodied living organism – of
being a body – without any clearly definable spatial extent or specific
content. We’ll come back to this bedrock layer of selfhood later. For now
it’s enough to think of it as the ‘feeling of being alive’.
Moving on from the body, there’s the experience of perceiving the
world from a particular point of view, of having a first-person perspective
– a subjective point of origin for perceptual experience which usually
appears to reside inside the head, located somewhere between the eyes
and slightly behind the forehead. This perspectival self is nowhere better
illustrated than in the Austrian physicist Ernst Mach’s self-portrait, also
known as ‘View from the Left Eye’.
Experiences of volition, of intending to do things – intention – and of
being the cause of things that happen – agency – are also central to

selfhood. This is the volitional self. When people talk about ‘free will’ it
is these aspects of selfhood that they are usually talking about. For many
people the notion of ‘free will’ captures that aspect of being-a-self which
they’re least willing to give up to science.

Fig. 16: Ernst Mach, Self-portrait (1886).

All these ways of being-a-self can be in place prior to any concept of
personal identity – the identity that can be associated with a name, a
history, and a future. As we saw with the teletransportation paradox, for
personal identity to exist, there has to be a personalised prior history, a
thread of autobiographical memories, a remembered past and a projected
future.
This sense of personal identity, when it emerges, can be called the
narrative self. With its appearance comes the ability to experience
sophisticated emotions like regret, as opposed to mere disappointment.
(We humans can also suffer ‘anticipatory regret’ – the feeling of certainty
that what I’m about to do will turn out badly, that despite knowing this I
will do it anyway, and that I and others will suffer as a consequence.)
Here we can see how different levels of selfhood ramify and interact –
the emergence of personal identity both changes and is partly defined by
the increased range of emotional states on offer.
The social self is all about how I perceive others perceiving me. It is
the part of me that arises from my being embedded in a social network.

The social self emerges gradually during childhood and continues to
evolve throughout life, though it may develop differently in conditions
like autism. Social selfhood brings with it its own gamut of emotional
possibilities, from new ways to feel bad – like guilt and shame – to ways
of feeling good, such as pride, love, and belonging.
For each of us – in normal circumstances – these diverse elements of
selfhood are bound together, all of a piece, all subsumed within an
overarching unified experience – the experience of being you. The
unified character of this experience can seem so natural – as natural as
the perceptual binding of colour and shape when you look at a red chair –
that it is easy to take for granted.
To do so would be a mistake. Just as experiences of redness are not
indications of an externally existing ‘red’, experiences of unified
selfhood do not signify the existence of an ‘actual self’. Indeed, the
experience of being a unified self can come undone all too easily. The
sense of personal identity, built on the narrative self, can erode or
disappear entirely in dementia and in severe cases of amnesia, and it can
be warped and distorted in cases of delirium, whether hospital-induced or
not. The volitional self can go awry in conditions like schizophrenia and
alien hand syndrome, when people experience a reduced sense of
connection with their own actions, or in akinetic mutism, a disorder in
which people stop interacting with their surroundings altogether. Out-ofbody experiences and other dissociative disorders affect the perspectival
self, while disorders of body ownership range from phantom limb
syndrome – the experience of persistent, often painful sensations located
in a limb that is no longer there – to somatoparaphrenia – the experience
that one of your limbs belongs to someone else. In xenomelia – an
extreme form of somatoparaphrenia – people experience an intense desire
to amputate an arm or a leg, a drastic remedy which on rare occasions
they actually carry out.
The self is not an immutable entity that lurks behind the windows of
the eyes, looking out into the world and controlling the body as a pilot
controls a plane. The experience of being me, or of being you, is a
perception itself – or better, a collection of perceptions – a tightly woven
bundle of neurally encoded predictions geared towards keeping your
body alive. And this, I believe, is all we need to be, to be who we are.

—
Take the experience of identifying with a particular object in the world
that is your body. The changeable and precariously assembled nature of
these experiences is evident not only in conditions like
somatoparaphrenia and phantom limb syndrome, it can also be revealed
by simple laboratory experiments. The best-known example is the
‘rubber hand illusion’, first described more than twenty years ago, and
now a cornerstone of research on embodiment.
The rubber hand illusion is easy to try out for yourself – all you need
is a willing volunteer, some pieces of cardboard to form a barrier, a
couple of paintbrushes, and a rubber hand. The set-up is shown in the
illustration opposite. The volunteer places her (real) hand on one side of
the cardboard partition, out of sight. The rubber hand is placed in front of
her, in the location and orientation that her real hand would normally
occupy. Then the experimenter takes the paintbrushes and gently strokes
both her real hand and the rubber hand, back and forth. The idea is that
when the hands are stroked synchronously, she will develop the uncanny
feeling that the rubber hand is somehow actually part of her body, even
though she knows that it isn’t. But when the hands are stroked
asynchronously, out of time, the illusion should not develop and she will
not assimilate the rubber hand into her experience of what is her body.

Fig. 17: The rubber hand illusion. When the rubber hand and the real hand
are stroked simultaneously (left), the experience of body ownership can shift
so that the rubber hand may begin to feel like part of the person’s body
(right).

For some people this is an apt description of what happens, and the
feeling that an evidently fake hand is somehow-but-not-entirely part of
one’s body is undeniably peculiar. Having said this, the actual experience
varies considerably from person to person. One way to investigate this is
to suddenly threaten the rubber hand with a hammer or a knife – you’ll
be sure to get a strong reaction when the illusion is working.
The rubber hand illusion fits neatly with the idea that experiences of
body ownership are special kinds of controlled hallucination. The idea is
that in the synchronous-stroking condition, the combination of seeing the
rubber hand be touched and simultaneously feeling (but not seeing) the
touch on the real hand provides enough sensory evidence for the brain to
reach a perceptual best guess that the rubber hand is somehow part of the
body. This happens in the synchronous – but not the asynchronous –
condition because of a prior expectation that simultaneously arriving
sensory signals are likely to have a common source – the rubber hand.
It is not just body parts that can be experienced differently. The whole
body – and the origin of the first-person perspective – can be affected
too.
In 2007 two papers appeared in the prestigious journal Science at
almost the same time. Both described how new methods in virtual reality
could be used to generate an ‘out-of-body-like’ experience. The
experiments were based on the rubber hand illusion, but now extended to
the entire body. In one of the studies, conducted by a group in Lausanne
led by Olaf Blanke, volunteers wore a head-mounted display through
which they saw a virtual reality representation of the back of their own
body from a distance of about two metres (see opposite). From this
perspective, they then saw the virtual body being stroked with a
paintbrush, again either synchronously or asynchronously with strokes
applied to their own (real) body. When the stroking was synchronous,
most participants reported that they felt the virtual body was, to some
extent, their ‘own’ body, and when asked to walk to where they felt their
body was, they showed a drift in space towards the location of the virtual
body.
In the same way that the rubber hand illusion hints at a moment-tomoment flexibility of body ownership, experiments like this – which are
called ‘full body illusions’ – suggest that the subjective ownership of the
entire body, and the location of the first-person perspective, can also be

manipulated on the fly. These experiments provide fascinating evidence
that experiences of ‘what is my body’ can be dissociated, at least to some
extent, from experiences of ‘where I am’.

Fig. 18: Creating a ‘full body illusion’.

The idea that one’s first-person perspective can leave the physical
body in the form of out-of-body experiences – OBEs – is deeply
inscribed into history and culture. Reports of OBEs or OBE-like
experiences during traumatic near-death experiences, in operating
theatres, and in the periphery of epileptic seizures have fuelled beliefs in
an immaterial essence-of-self. After all, if you can see yourself from the
outside, then surely the basis of your consciousness must be separable
from your brain?
But there’s no need to reach for such dualistic skyhooks if you take
the first-person perspective to be another species of perceptual inference.
This view is supported not only by the virtual reality experiments of Olaf
Blanke and others, but also by brain stimulation studies going all the way
back to a series of seminal experiments conducted in the 1940s by the
Canadian neurologist Wilder Penfield.
Among Penfield’s patients was a woman known as G.A. who, when
electrically stimulated in her right superior temporal gyrus – part of the
brain’s temporal lobe – spontaneously exclaimed, ‘I have a queer
sensation that I am not here … As though I were half here and half not

here.’ Blanke himself first became fascinated by OBEs when a patient of
his, stimulated in a similar part of the brain – the angular gyrus, at the
junction of the temporal and parietal lobes – reported a similar
experience: ‘I see myself lying in bed, from above, but I only see my
legs.’
The common factor in cases like these is unusual activity in brain
regions that deal with vestibular input (the vestibular system deals with
the sense of balance) and that are also involved in multisensory
integration. It seems that when normal activity in these systems becomes
disrupted, the brain can reach an unusual ‘best guess’ about the location
of its first-person perspective, even while other aspects of selfhood are
left unaltered.
The OBE-like experiences that sometimes accompany epileptic
seizures can also be traced to disruptions in these processes. These
experiences are usually divided into autoscopic hallucinations – in which
you see your surroundings from a different perspective – and
heautoscopic hallucinations (also known as doppelgänger hallucinations)
– in which you see yourself from a different perspective. The extensive
documentation of experiences like these – going back hundreds of years
– is further evidence for the malleability of the first-person perspective.†
When people report apparently supernatural or otherwise bizarre
experiences, like OBEs, we should take seriously their reports. They
probably do have the experiences they say they have. People have had
real out-of-body experiences for millennia, but this does not mean that
immaterial selves or immutable souls have ever actually left any physical
bodies. What these reports reveal is that first-person perspectives are put
together in more complex, provisional, and precarious ways than we will
ever have direct subjective access to.
—
In the virtual world, the ability to alter first-person perspectives is
generating some fascinating applications, many of them driven by the
intriguingly named ‘body swap’ illusion, which was described in a 2008
study led by the Swedish researcher Henrik Ehrsson. In the body swap
set-up, two people wear head-mounted displays, each with a camera
attached. By swapping the camera feeds between the headsets, each

person can see themselves from the other’s point of view. The effect
kicks in properly only when they shake hands. The idea is that seeing and
simultaneously feeling the handshake provides the multisensory
stimulation so that, when combined with top-down expectations, each
person feels they are now somehow located in the other person’s body,
shaking hands with themselves. This experience puts you, albeit virtually,
in the shoes of another.
I tried out virtual body swapping for myself at a small gathering in
Ojai, California, in the winter of 2018. I was there along with Daanish
Masood, a United Nations peacebroker who also happens to be a virtual
reality researcher. For several years Masood had been working closely
with BeAnotherLab, the brainchild of Barcelona-based neuroscientist
Mel Slater. The aim of BeAnotherLab is to adapt body-swapping
technology into novel ‘empathy generation’ devices. By experiencing
what it’s like to perceive the world from within the virtual body of
another, their idea is that empathy for the other’s situation will naturally
follow.
Daanish had brought his team to Ojai to demonstrate their system,
called The Machine to Be Another. Their set-up adds some clever
choreography to the basic body-swapping principle that makes the effect
even more powerful. Two participants put on headsets, and first look
down at their laps, so that they see their partner’s body instead of their
own. They then make a series of co-ordinated movements, following
detailed instructions, and if they follow along closely enough their new
body will appear to respond to their commands, strengthening the
experience of being the other. After some time, mirrors are held up, and
each sees the mirror image of the other, as if it were himself or herself. In
the final act, the curtain separating the two people is removed, and they
look at themselves from within the other’s body, before approaching each
other and giving themselves a hug.
When it was my turn to try this out, I exchanged my own perspective
with that of a rather well-to-do woman in her seventies. The experience
was unexpectedly compelling. I remember looking down, flexing my
(her) hand, and noticing – with some surprise – the glittering sneakers I
(she) was wearing. The mirror and the final hug were particularly
powerful – I was not sure whether for the experience of feeling myself to
be inhabiting someone else’s body, or for the experience of seeing myself

from another’s perspective. Only later, at dinner, did it occur to me to
wonder how odd it must also have been for my partner to be suddenly
transported into the first-person perspective of a mixed-race English
neuroscientist with boring shoes.
—
I find it fascinating that these familiar and easily taken-for-granted
aspects of selfhood – subjective body ownership and the first-person
perspective – can be so readily manipulated, whether with fake hands and
paintbrushes or with the new technologies of virtual and augmented
reality. However, there are limits to how far these manipulations can go.
As I mentioned earlier, the typical experience in the rubber hand illusion
is of somehow feeling the fake hand to be part of one’s body, while
clearly knowing that it isn’t. And this ‘typical’ experience varies
considerably from person to person, with many people not feeling much
at all. The same is likely true for full body and body swap illusions too.
These experimental manipulations of body ownership are in this way
very different from classic visual illusions, such as Adelson’s
Checkerboard, which we met in chapter 4. In the case of the
checkerboard, we are so perceptually convinced that the squares are
different shades of grey that we are surprised – perhaps astonished –
when it is revealed that they are in fact the same shade. This kind of
surprise, common in visual illusions, almost never happens in body
ownership illusions. For me, the most compelling body illusion so far has
been the body swapping I tried out in Ojai – but at no point was I ever
close to believing I was now someone else, or somewhere else.
The subjective weakness of body ownership illusions is highlighted
by a recent study which I was involved in, examining the role of hypnotic
suggestibility in the rubber hand illusion. The reasoning behind this study
– which was led by psychologists Peter Lush and Zoltán Dienes – was
that the experimental set-up of the illusion provides a strong implicit
expectation for what should be experienced, and that these expectations
may be enough to actually drive altered experiences of body ownership
in some people. Supporting this hypothesis, we found that individual
differences in the strength of the illusion correlated with how suggestible
a person is, when measured on a standard scale of hypnotisability. People

who were highly hypnotisable reported strong feelings of ownership (for
synchronous stroking), while those who scored low on the scale were
hardly susceptible at all.
On one hand, this finding fits neatly with the controlled hallucination
view of body ownership, since a hypnotic suggestion can be thought of as
a powerful top-down expectation – albeit one that the participant may not
be aware of having. On the other hand, it poses a serious challenge for
experimental research in this area, because it raises the possibility that
the rubber hand illusion might be largely or entirely driven by suggestion
effects. Unless studies of embodiment illusions take individual
differences in suggestibility into account, which by and large they
haven’t, it is difficult for them to say anything specific about the
mechanisms involved. This holds whether we’re talking about rubber
hands, out-of-body-like experiences, body swap illusions, or any other
situation in which people are led – implicitly or explicitly – to expect a
particular body-related experience.
There is a sharp contrast between these subjectively mild body
ownership illusions and the powerfully altered experiences seen in
clinical conditions like somatoparaphrenia, xenomelia, and phantom limb
syndrome, or in the vivid out-of-body experiences associated with
seizures or triggered by direct brain stimulation. These dramatic
distortions are much more like classical visual illusions in that they elicit
much greater conviction from those having the unusual experience. And
for this reason they provide much stronger evidence that experiences of
embodiment and perspective are indeed constructions of the brain.
—
Let’s move on to matters of personal identity and to the emergence of the
‘narrative’ and the ‘social’ selves. As we saw with the teletransportation
paradox, it’s at these levels that an entity experiences itself as continuous
from one moment to the next, from one day, or week, or month to the
next, and – to some extent – across an entire lifespan. These are the
levels of selfhood at which it makes sense to associate the self with a
name, with memories of the past and with plans for the future. At these
levels we become aware that we have a self – we become truly selfaware.

These higher reaches of selfhood are fully dissociable from the
embodied self. Many non-human animals, as well as human infants, may
experience embodied selfhood without having – or missing – any
accompanying sense of personal identity. And while adult humans
normally experience all these forms of selfhood in an integrated and
unified way, when the narrative and social aspects of self are diminished
or destroyed, the impact can be devastating.
Clive Wearing is a British musicologist renowned for editing the
works of the Renaissance composer Orlande de Lassus, for working as a
choirmaster in London, and for reshaping the musical content of BBC
Radio 3 during the early 1980s. In March 1985, at the height of his
career, he suffered a devastating brain infection, a herpes encephalitis
that wrought massive damage to his hippocampus in both cerebral
hemispheres, producing in him one of the most profound amnesias ever
documented.‡
Wearing has immense problems recalling old memories (retrograde
amnesia) and, especially, laying down new memories (anterograde
amnesia). Remarkably, he seems to exist in a permanent present of
between seven and thirty seconds. He’s now in his eighties, and it’s likely
that he still experiences his life as a continuous series of miniawakenings, as if – every twenty seconds or so – he has just emerged
from a coma, or from anaesthesia. His narrative self has been annihilated.
The kind of memory Clive has lost is his episodic, autobiographical
memory – memory of events located in time and space (episodic),
including, most importantly, those events involving himself
(autobiographical). His diaries make for harrowing reading. They are
filled with repeated descriptions of a ‘first’ awakening, one after the
other, with previous assertions – some written just moments ago –
crossed out and sometimes angrily obliterated.
8:31am
9:06am
9:34am

Now I am really, completely, awake
Now I am perfectly, overwhelmingly awake
Now I am superlatively, actually awake

These diaries, and the conversations with Clive recorded by his wife
Deborah in her book Forever Today, testify to the assault on his sense of
his personal identity inflicted by the damage to his brain. His inability to

string together a self-narrative over time means that what-it-is-to-be-him
has been, for more than thirty years, a continual starting from scratch, a
fleeting presence with no stable ‘I’ around which to organise the flow of
perceptions of world and self. Marooned in the present by the depths of
his amnesia, his loss of a past and of a future is so dislocating that he
even questions whether he is, or was, alive. Deborah Wearing writes:
‘Clive was under the constant impression that he had just emerged from
unconsciousness because he had no evidence in his own mind of ever
being awake before … “I haven’t heard anything, seen anything, touched
anything, smelled anything,” he would say. “It’s like being dead.”’
At the same time, other aspects of Clive’s sense of self remain fully
intact. He has no problems with experiences of body ownership, with the
origin of his first-person perspective, or even with making voluntary
actions. His love for his wife remains undiminished even though
sometimes he cannot remember meeting her – they married just a year
before his illness. And when Clive plays the piano, or sings, or conducts,
the music falls freely from him with a fluency that makes him seem
whole again.
For Clive, these moments of love and music are transformational and
redemptive. Oliver Sacks, in a characteristically evocative New Yorker
piece, described his situation like this: ‘He no longer has any inner
narrative; he is not leading a life in the sense that the rest of us do. And
yet one has only to see him at the keyboard or with Deborah to feel that,
at such times, he is himself again and wholly alive.’
Despite these moments of grace, Clive’s situation is undoubtedly
tragic. The destruction of his narrative self is more than just a deficit of
memory; it brings an inability to perceive himself as continuous over
time, and with that comes an erosion of his fundamental sense of
personal identity that most of us, quite naturally, take for granted.
Memory is not the be-all and end-all of selfhood, but as this story tells us,
and as many of us know through family and friends in the hinterlands of
dementia or of Alzheimer’s disease, the persistence and continuity of
self-perception is difficult to do without.
—

The power of Clive and Deborah’s love for each other to restore Clive’s
sense of identity brings us to the ‘social self’.
Humans, like many other animals, are social creatures. Perceiving the
state of mind of another is a crucial ability for social creatures in all sorts
of contexts and in all manner of societies. This ability – sometimes called
‘theory of mind’ – is often thought to develop rather slowly in humans,
but it comes to play a key role for almost all of us throughout our lives.
At times we can be acutely aware of this, for example when we are
worrying what a partner, friend, or colleague may be thinking about us.
But even when we aren’t ruminating on our social interactions, our
ability to perceive others’ intentions, beliefs, and desires is always
operating in the background, guiding our behaviour and shaping our
emotions.
There is a vast literature on social perception and theory of mind,
encompassing psychology, sociology, and more recently the emerging
field of social neuroscience. Much of this literature examines these topics
in terms of their importance for guiding social interactions. Here, I want
to turn the lens inwards, to consider how the experience of being me
depends, in a substantial way, on how I perceive others perceiving me.
Social perception – perception of the mental states of others – is not
just a matter of explicit reasoning or ‘thinking about’ what others may or
may not be thinking. Much of our social perception is automatic and
direct. We form perceptions of others’ beliefs, emotions, and intentions
as naturally and effortlessly as we form perceptions of cats and coffee
cups and chairs and even of our own bodies. When I pour myself another
glass of wine and I see my friend has moved her empty glass closer,
there’s no need for me to rationally figure out what her intention is; I
simply perceive that she’d like some more wine too, and that I should’ve
poured hers first. I perceive these mental states as effortlessly, though not
necessarily as accurately, as I perceive the glass itself.
How does this happen? The answer, I think, lies again with the idea of
the brain as a prediction machine, and with perception as a process of
inferring the causes of sensory signals.
Both non-social and social perception involve the brain making best
guesses about the causes of sensory inputs. Sometimes, as we all know,
we can get things very wrong when perceiving what’s in another’s mind,
whereas we never confuse a wine glass with a car (unless we are

hallucinating). One reason for the inherent ambiguity of social perception
is that the relevant causes are more deeply hidden. The light waves that
elicit perception of a wine glass originate more or less directly from the
glass itself, but the sensory signals relevant to others’ mental states must
pass through a number of intermediate stages – through facial
expressions, gestures, and speech acts – with each stage creating a new
opportunity for an off-target inference.
Just as with visual perception, social perceptions depend on context
and expectation, and we can try to minimise ‘social prediction errors’
through changing sensory data – an interpersonal form of active
inference – as well as by updating predictions. Active inference in social
perception amounts to behaving so as to change another’s mental state to
bring it in line with what we predict – or desire – it to be. For example,
we smile not only to express our own pleasure but also to change the way
our companion is feeling, and when we speak we are trying to insert
thoughts into another’s mind.
These ideas about social perception can be linked to the social self in
the following way. The ability to infer others’ mental states requires, as
does all perceptual inference, a generative model. Generative models, as
we know, are able to generate the sensory signals corresponding to a
particular perceptual hypothesis. For social perception, this means a
hypothesis about another’s mental states. This implies a high degree of
reciprocity. My best model of your mental states will include a model of
how you model my mental states. In other words, I can only understand
what’s in your mind if I try to understand how you are perceiving the
contents of my mind. It is in this way that we perceive ourselves
refracted through the minds of others. This is what the social self is all
about, and these socially nested predictive perceptions are an important
part of the overall experience of being a human self.
One intriguing implication of this construal of the social self is that
self-awareness – the higher reaches of selfhood comprising both narrative
and social aspects – might necessarily require a social context. If you
exist in a world without any other minds – more specifically, without any
other relevant minds – there would be no need for your brain to predict
the mental states of others, and therefore no need for it to infer that its
own experiences and actions belong to any self at all. John Donne’s

seventeenth-century meditation that ‘no man is an island’ could be
literally true.
—
Are you the same person you were yesterday? Perhaps a better question:
Do you experience being yourself in the same way you did yesterday?
Probably – barring some major overnight incident – you will say yes.
What about last week, last month, last year, ten years ago, when you were
four years old; or what about when you are ninety-four – will you be the
same person then? Will it seem that way to you?
A striking but often overlooked aspect of conscious selfhood is that
we generally experience ourselves as being continuous and unified across
time. We can call this the subjective stability of the self. It holds not only
in terms of a continuity of autobiographical memory, but in a deeper
sense of experiencing oneself as persisting from moment to moment,
whether at the level of the biological body or at the level of personal
identity.
Compared to perceptual experiences of the outside world, self-related
experiences are remarkably stable. Our perceptions of the world are
always changing, objects and scenes coming and going in a continual
flux of events. Self-related experiences seem to change much less. Even
though we know we change over time – most of us have more than
enough photographic evidence for that – it still seems to us that we don’t
change all that much. Unless we’re suffering from psychiatric or
neurological illness, the experience of being a self seems to be an
enduring centre within a changing world. William James – the
nineteenth-century pioneer of psychology – said it well: ‘Contrary to the
perception of an object, which can be perceived from different
perspectives or even cease to be perceived, we experience “the feeling of
the same old body always there”.’
Now you might think there’s nothing to see here. After all, bodies –
and other targets of self-related perception – plausibly do change less
than the things we perceive out there in the world. I can move from room
to room, but my body and my actions and my first-person perspective
always accompany me. On these grounds it may not be surprising that the

self is experienced as changing less than the world. But I think there’s
more to it than this.
As we saw in chapter 6, the experience of change is itself a perceptual
inference. Our perceptions may change, but this doesn’t mean that we
perceive them as changing. This distinction is exemplified by the
phenomenon of ‘change blindness’, in which slowly changing things (in
the world) do not evoke any corresponding experience of change. The
same principle will apply to self-perceptions too. We are becoming
different people all the time. Our perceptions of self are continually
changing – you are a slightly different person now than when you started
reading this chapter – but this does not mean that we perceive these
changes.
This subjective blindness to the changing self has consequences. For
one thing, it fosters the false intuition that the self is an immutable entity,
rather than a bundle of perceptions. But this is not the reason that
evolution designed our experiences of selfhood this way. I believe that
the subjective stability of the self goes beyond even the change blindness
warranted by our slowly changing bodies and brains. We live with an
exaggerated, extreme form of self-change-blindness, and to understand
why, we need to understand the reason we perceive ourselves in the first
place.
We do not perceive ourselves in order to know ourselves, we perceive
ourselves in order to control ourselves.
Notes
teletransportation paradox: This thought experiment has been independently attributed to the
philosopher Derek Parfit and the author Stanislaw Lem.
‘bundle’ of perceptions: This view of the self has been immortalised in philosophy as ‘bundle
theory’.
very brilliant book: Metzinger (2003a).
one craniopagus twin can feel: This is the case of Krista and Tatiana Hogan, from British
Columbia in Canada: www.nytimes.com/2011/05/29/magazine/could-conjoined-twins-share-amind.html.
can come undone: See Brugger & Lenggenhager (2014) for a review of disorders of the bodily
self.
behind the windows of the eyes: For a classic first-person deconstruction of this intuition see
Douglas Harding’s On Having No Head (1961).
cornerstone of research: The original paper describing the rubber hand illusion was published in
1998 (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998) and has spawned a small industry of follow-up studies.
People have looked at whether three-hand or no-hand illusions are possible, at whether

inducing ownership of hands with different skin colours can alter implicit racial biases, and
even at whether mice are susceptible to a ‘rubber tail’ illusion. See Braun et al. (2018) and
Riemer et al. (2019) for reviews.
extended to the entire body: The experiment also worked when volunteers saw the back of a fake,
computer-generated body – an ‘avatar’ – rather than their own body. See Ehrsson (2007);
Lenggenhager et al. (2007).
inscribed into history and culture: Monroe (1971).
I have a queer sensation: Quoted in Tong (2003), p. 105.
I see myself lying: Blanke et al. (2004), p. 248.
The common factor: Blanke et al. (2015).
evidence for the malleability: See Brugger & Lenggenhager (2014).
‘body swap’ illusion: Petkova & Ehrsson (2008).
The aim of BeAnotherLab: www.themachinetobeanother.org.
highlighted by a recent study: Lush et al. (2020). In this paper, we use the term
‘phenomenological control’ rather than ‘hypnosis’, partly because ‘hypnosis’ carries
unfortunate historical baggage. The idea that implicit expectations arising from experimental
design can affect participants’ experiences and behaviour is a well-known, though often
insufficiently appreciated issue in psychology, tracing back to early work on so-called
‘demand characteristics’ (Orne, 1962). Importantly, simply contrasting synchronous versus
asynchronous stroking is not enough to control for demand characteristics in the rubber hand
illusion, because people have strong expectations about what to experience in these different
conditions (Lush, 2020). For a summary of our studies on the rubber hand illusion,
phenomenological control, and demand characteristics, see Seth et al. (2021).
hypnotic suggestion: As well as inducing behaviours and reports of subjective experiences,
hypnotic suggestion can generate physiological and neurophysiological responses (or suppress
them, in the case of hypnotic analgesia) (Barber, 1961; M. P. Jensen et al., 2017; Stoelb et al.,
2009). These ostensibly more objective measures may therefore also be confounded by
suggestibility. Fortunately, all this can be seen as an opportunity, not just as a problem.
Hypnotic suggestion provides a powerful method for studying how top-down expectations can
generate, or extinguish, perceptual experience. We are currently running a number of
experiments to look more deeply into which kinds of perceptual experience – of the self and of
the world – can be shaped or generated by suggestion effects.
truly self-aware: The Estonian-Canadian psychologist Endel Tulving has called this kind of selfawareness ‘autonoetic consciousness’ (Tulving, 1985).
His diaries: Diary entries from Deborah Wearing’s Forever Today (2005).
Clive was under the constant impression: Wearing (2005), pp. 202–3.
He no longer has: www.newyorker.com/magazine/2007/09/24/the-abyss.
social perception: The existence of direct social perception, defined this way, is not universally
accepted. Other approaches propose instead that our awareness of others’ mental states is
inferred from their behaviour in a manner that is distinct from perception. See Gallagher
(2008) and C. J. Palmer et al. (2015) for more on this.
Active inference in social perception: An implication of social active inference is that, just like
visual active inference, the underlying generative models encode conditional predictions about
the consequences of actions. In vision, as we saw in chapter 6, these predictions are about how
visual sensory signals would change given this-or-that action. There, I argued that these
conditional predictions underlie the phenomenological property of ‘objecthood’. In a 2015
paper, Colin Palmer, Jakob Hohwy and I proposed that something similar happens in social
perception. Our idea is that others’ mental states seem ‘real’ to the extent that our brain

encodes a rich repertoire of conditional predictions about how they may change given this-orthat action. For example, such a prediction may be about how someone’s belief or emotional
state would change given a particular utterance (like ‘go get me some wine’). This idea
provides a prediction machine gloss on what it means to have a theory of mind, and it may
provide a useful way of interpreting apparent deficits in social perception, as happens for
example in autism. See C. J. Palmer et al. (2015).
socially nested predictive perceptions: Neuroscientific discussions of social perception often
highlight so-called ‘mirror neurons’. These neurons – first discovered in monkey brains by the
Italian neuroscientist Giacomo Rizzolatti and his colleagues – fire away both when an animal
acts, and when it observes the same action performed by another animal (Gallese et al., 1996).
The neurons are said to ‘mirror’ the behaviour of other animals, because they respond as
though the observer itself were acting. The ability of these neurons to respond in this way has
been proposed as a foundation for all manner of social phenomena. Such proposals, however,
place a heavy explanatory burden on what in the end are just specific types of brain cell. They
commit the same error of simplification that people make when, on the basis of fMRI scans,
they may say that activity in this-or-that region explains ‘love’ or ‘language’. See Caramazza
et al. (2014).
no man is an island: ‘No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a
part of the main.’ Donne (1839), pp. 574–5. The psychologist Chris Frith has taken this view
even further, arguing that the primary function of all conscious experience is social (Frith,
2007).
at the level of personal identity: Antonio Damasio highlights this aspect of selfhood in his book
The Feeling of What Happens (Damasio, 2000).
Contrary to the perception: James (1890), p. 242.
*
†
‡

Even without teletransportation, the cells in our body are continuously turning over, most
being replaced every ten years or so – a biological Ship of Theseus. This doesn’t seem to
impact our sense of personal identity very much.
Doppelgänger hallucinations were popularised by Fyodor Dostoevsky in his 1846
novella The Double. Dostoevsky was known to suffer from severe epilepsy.
The hippocampus is a small, curved structure lying deep in the medial temporal lobe,
which has long been associated with memory consolidation. The name comes from the
Greek word for ‘seahorse’.

9
Being a Beast Machine
We do not see things as they are, we see them as we are.
ANAÏS NIN

Self-perception is not about discovering what’s out there in the world, or
in here, in the body. It’s about physiological control and regulation – it’s
about staying alive. To understand why this is so, and what it means for
all our conscious experiences, let’s begin by looking back at a very old
debate about how life and mind relate.
In the Great Chain of Being – the medieval Christian hierarchy of all
matter and all life – God is at the top. Just below are angelic beings, then
humans – with various socially convenient subdivisions – then other
animals, plants, and finally minerals. Every thing in its place and every
thing having its own powers and abilities, determined by its place in the
Chain.
Within the Chain, we humans are balanced awkwardly between the
spiritual realm inhabited by God and the angels, and the physical realm
of animals, plants, and minerals. We possess immortal souls and are
capable of reason, love, and imagination, but we are also susceptible to
physical passions – like pain, hunger, and sexual desire – through being
tied to a physical body.
For centuries, especially in Europe, the Great Chain of Being – or
Scala Naturae – provided a stable template by which humans could
understand their place in nature, as well as their value compared to other
humans – kings being higher up the Chain than peasants, for instance.
Then, in the seventeenth century, René Descartes did away with the many
gradations of the Scala by cleaving the universe into just two modes of
existence: res cogitans (mind stuff) and res extensa (matter stuff).
This sweeping simplification of nature’s big picture brought with it
many new problems. There was the metaphysical problem of how the
two domains could ever interact – a question which has framed

investigations of consciousness, for better or worse, and largely for
worse, ever since. There were disruptions too to the fine-grained ordering
on which political and religious authority depended. If animals had
elements of res cogitans, any signs of minds, what was to prevent them
from aspiring to the spiritual realm, as humans could? And any attempt to
intellectually investigate the soul – as Descartes seemingly advocated –
was sure to annoy the powerful Catholic Church.
Descartes always played his cards carefully with the church, going as
far as attempting to prove the existence of a benevolent God in his third
and fifth Meditations. When it came to non-human animals, it is often
claimed that he thought they lacked consciousness entirely. Although it is
hard to be sure, this was probably not his view.* Descartes’ primary claim
about non-human animals was that they lacked souls and all the rational,
spiritual, and conscious attributes that came along with having a soul.
The historian Wallace Shugg summarised his views on the matter like
this:
The bodies of both man and beast … are merely machines that
breathe, digest, perceive and move by means of the arrangement of
parts. But only in man does reason direct bodily movements to meet
all contingencies; only man gives evidence of his reason by using
true speech. Without minds to direct their bodily movements or
receive sensation, animals must be regarded as unthinking, unfeeling
machines that move like clockwork.
On this view, the flesh-and-blood properties of living beings – their
nature as organisms – are entirely and explicitly irrelevant to the presence
of mind, consciousness, or soul (whatever that may be). Non-human
animals are best thought of as bêtes-machines – in English, ‘beast
machines’. In the Cartesian picture, the division between mind and life is
as sharp as that between res cogitans and res extensa.
By reinforcing the specialness of humans Descartes was able to
placate many of his would-be persecutors. But a dangerous door was now
ajar. If non-human animals are beast machines, and if humans are a kind
of animal too – humans, after all, certainly seemed to be made of the
same sort of flesh, blood, cartilage, and bone – then surely the faculties

of mind and reason should also be explicable in mechanistic,
physiological terms?
The French philosopher Julien Offray de La Mettrie, writing in the
middle of the eighteenth century, certainly saw things this way. He
extended Descartes’ beast machine argument to human beings, arguing
that humans were machines too – l’homme machine (man machine) – and
in doing so denying any special immaterial status for the soul while also
questioning the existence of God. La Mettrie was not one to finesse his
arguments for the benefit of religious authority, and so his life rapidly
became a lot more complicated than Descartes’. In 1748 he was forced to
flee his adopted home in the Netherlands to work for the Prussian King
Frederick in Berlin, where three years later he died after consuming an
excess of pâté.
While in the Cartesian view mind and life are independent, for La
Mettrie they were deeply connected in the sense that mind could be
viewed as a property of life. Even today, discussions rumble on about
whether life and mind are continuous or discontinuous, in terms of their
underlying mechanisms and principles.
My sympathies in this debate lie with La Mettrie, but rather than
speaking in general terms about ‘mind’, my focus is on consciousness.
This brings us to the heart of my ‘beast machine’ theory of consciousness
and self. Our conscious experiences of the world around us, and of
ourselves within it, happen with, through, and because of our living
bodies. Our animal constitution is not merely compatible with our
conscious perceptions of self and world. My proposal is that we cannot
understand the nature and origin of these conscious experiences, except
in light of our nature as living creatures.
—
Underneath the layered expressions of selfhood involving memories of
the past and plans for the future, before the explicit sense of personal
identity, beneath the ‘I’ and even prior to the emergence of a first-person
perspective and experiences of body ownership, there are deeper layers
of selfhood still to be found. These bedrock layers are intimately tied to
the interior of the body, rather than to the body as an object in the world,
and they range from emotions and moods – what psychologists call

‘affective’ experiences – to a basal, formless, and ever-present sense of
simply ‘being’ an embodied, living organism.
We’ll start our exploration of these depths with emotions and moods.
These forms of conscious content are central to the experience of being
an embodied self, and – like all perceptions – they too can be understood
as Bayesian best guesses about the causes of sensory signals. The
distinctive thing about affective experiences is that the relevant causes
are to be found within the body, rather than out there in the world.
When we think about perception, we tend to think in terms of the
different ways in which we sense the outside world – in particular the
familiar modalities of sight, hearing, taste, touch, and smell. These
world-oriented varieties of sensation and perception are collectively
called exteroception. Perception of the body from within is known as
interoception – it is the ‘sense of the internal physiological condition of
the body’. † Interoceptive sensory signals are typically transmitted from
the body’s internal organs – the viscera – to the central nervous system,
conveying information about the state of those organs, as well as about
the functioning of the body as a whole. Interoceptive signals report things
like heartbeats, blood pressure levels, various low-level aspects of blood
chemistry, degrees of gastric tension, how breathing is going, and so on.
These signals travel through a complex network of nerves and deep-lying
brain regions in the brainstem and thalamus before arriving at parts of the
cortex specialised for interoceptive processing – in particular the insular
cortex. ‡ The key property of interoceptive signals is that they reflect, in
one way or another, how well physiological regulation of the body is
going. In other words, how good a job the brain is doing of keeping its
body alive.
Interoceptive signalling has long been connected with emotion and
mood. Back in 1884, William James and – independently – Carl Lange
argued that emotions were not the ‘eternal and sacred psychic entities’ of
the ancient philosophers, nor were they hard-wired into brain circuits by
evolution, as Darwin had proposed not long before. Instead, they argued
that emotions are perceptions of changes in bodily state. We don’t cry
because we are sad, we are sad because we perceive our bodily state in
the condition of crying. The emotion of fear, in this view, is constituted
by (interoceptive) perception of a whole gamut of bodily responses set
off by the organism recognising danger in its environment. For James,

the perception of bodily changes as they occur is the emotion: ‘We feel
sorry because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we
tremble, and not that we cry, strike, or tremble, because we are sorry,
angry, or fearful.’
James’s theory encountered strong resistance at the time, in part
because it subverts the common, intuitive, how-things-seem notion that
emotions cause bodily responses, rather than the other way around. It
seems as though the feeling of fear – for example, when we happen upon
a grizzly bear – is what causes our heart to race, our adrenaline to pump,
and our feet to flee. By now, though, we’ve learned to be sceptical about
taking how things seem as a guide to how they actually are – so it would
be unwise to dismiss the Jamesian view on this basis alone.
A more substantive concern was that bodily states may be
insufficiently distinct from each other to support the full emotional range
that we humans experience. While the specifics of this concern are still
debated, a powerful response emerged in the 1960s with ‘appraisal
theories’ of emotion. On these theories, emotions are more than just
readouts of changes in bodily state. They depend on a higher-level
cognitive appraisal, or evaluation, of the context in which the
physiological changes take place.
Appraisal theories solve the problem of emotional range because each
specific emotion now no longer needs a dedicated bodily state. Two
closely related emotions – for example, listlessness and ennui – might be
based on the same bodily state. The distinct emotions would emerge from
different cognitive interpretations of this shared bodily condition. Of
course, it might equally be true – and I suspect that it probably is true –
that every emotion does indeed have a distinct embodied signature, with
the fine details of their distinguishing features just being very difficult to
detect.
My favourite experimental investigation of appraisal theory comes
from an inventive study by Donald Dutton and Arthur Aron in 1974, in
which a female interviewer approached male passers-by while they were
crossing one of two bridges across the Capilano River in North
Vancouver. One of the bridges was a 450-foot-long rickety suspension
bridge with low handrails, precariously poised high above shallow rapids.
The other was a shorter and sturdier affair made of heavy cedar,
positioned further upriver and only ten feet above the water. When the

interviewer made contact with each bridge-crosser, she invited him to fill
out a questionnaire, and she also offered her phone number, explaining
that she’d be happy to answer any further questions he might have.
The researchers wondered whether the men on the rickety bridge
would misinterpret the physiological arousal caused by their precarious
condition as sexual attraction, rather than as fear or anxiety. They
reasoned that if this were so, these men would be more likely to call the
interviewer after the event – maybe even ask her for a date.
This is exactly what happened. The female interviewer received more
calls from men who had been crossing the rickety bridge than from those
who had been crossing the sturdy bridge. Dutton and Aron called this a
‘misattribution of arousal’: increased physiological arousal, induced by
the rickety bridge, had been misinterpreted by higher-level cognitive
systems as sexual chemistry. Supporting this appraisal theory
interpretation (and assuming heterosexuality), when the questionnairebearer was a man, there was no effect of type of bridge on the number of
follow-up calls made.§
This study, conducted more than forty years ago, shows inevitable
methodological weaknesses when compared to today’s more rigorous
though still imperfect standards. Not to mention the dubious ethics. But it
still vividly illustrates the view that emotional experiences depend on
how physiological changes are evaluated by higher-level cognitive
processes.
One limitation of appraisal theories is that they assume a sharp
distinction between what is taken as ‘cognitive’ and what is not. Lowlevel, ‘non-cognitive’ perceptual systems are assumed to ‘read out’ the
physiological condition of the body, while higher-level cognitive systems
‘evaluate’ this condition through more abstract processes such as contextsensitive reasoning. For example, fear happens when a specific bodily
state is first perceived, and then later evaluated as being ‘due to the
presence of an approaching bear’. However, unfortunately for appraisal
theories, the brain does not separate neatly into ‘cognitive’ and ‘noncognitive’ domains.
Around 2010, as my research group at Sussex was getting off the
ground, I started thinking about this problem. I’d been learning a lot
about interoception from my colleague Hugo Critchley – one of the
world’s experts on the topic – and it occurred to me that a way to

overcome the limitations of appraisal theories was to apply the principles
of predictive perception, and to treat emotions and moods – and affective
experiences in general – as distinctive kinds of controlled hallucination.
I called the idea interoceptive inference. Just as the brain has no direct
access to the causes of exteroceptive sensory signals like vision, which
are out there in the world, it also lacks direct access to the causes of
interoceptive sensory signals, which lie inside the body. All causes of
sensory signals, wherever they are, are forever and always hidden behind
a sensory veil. Interoception is therefore also best understood as a
process of Bayesian best guessing, just like exteroceptive perception. In
the same way that ‘redness’ is the subjective aspect of brain-based
predictions about how some surfaces reflect light, emotions and moods
are the subjective aspects of predictions about the causes of interoceptive
signals. They are internally driven forms of controlled hallucination.¶
Just like visual predictions, interoceptive predictions operate at many
scales of time and space, supporting fluid, context-sensitive, multi-level
best guesses about the causes of interoceptive signals. In this way,
interoceptive inference solves the problem of emotional range without
needing any bright-line distinction between the non-cognitive and the
cognitive. Interoceptive inference is therefore more parsimonious than
appraisal theory, because it involves just one process (Bayesian best
guessing) rather than two (non-cognitive perception and cognitive
evaluation), and because of this it also maps more comfortably onto the
underlying brain anatomy.
Interoceptive inference is difficult to test experimentally, in part
because it is harder to measure and manipulate interoceptive signals than
is the case for exteroceptive modalities like vision. One promising
approach explores the possibility that brain responses to heartbeats might
be signatures of interoceptive prediction errors. The German
neuroscientist Frederike Petzschner has recently shown that such
responses, called ‘heartbeat evoked potentials’, are modulated by paying
attention, as predicted by interoceptive inference. More research along
these lines is needed.
Another more indirect line of evidence comes from experiments on
body ownership, like those we met in the previous chapter. In a 2013
study led by Keisuke Suzuki we found that people experienced greater
ownership over a virtual reality ‘rubber hand’ when it flashed in time

with their heartbeat than when it flashed out of time – suggesting that
body ownership depends on the integration of both exteroceptive and
interoceptive signals. This ‘cardio-visual synchrony’ method was also
used by Jane Aspell and her colleagues in a ‘full body illusion’ setup, in
which people viewed a virtual silhouette of their body. They too found
that people reported stronger identification with the silhouette when it
flashed in time with the heartbeat. While these studies are suggestive of
interoceptive inference, more research is needed here too, in part because
these experiments didn’t take account of individual differences in
hypnotic suggestibility – a factor we’ve since learned is very important in
body ownership experiments. They also depend on how aware a person is
of their own heartbeat, a trait which has proven frustratingly difficult to
measure.
From the perspective of the beast machine theory, the most important
implication of interoceptive inference is that affective experiences are not
merely shaped by interoceptive predictions but constituted by them.
Emotions and moods, like all perceptions, come from the inside out, not
the outside in. Whether it’s fear, anxiety, joy, or regret – every emotional
experience is rooted in top-down perceptual best guessing about the state
of the body (and about the causes of this state). Recognising this is the
first key step towards understanding how experiences of being an
embodied self are tied to our flesh-and-blood materiality.
To take the next step, we need to ask what these perceptions of the
body ‘from within’ are for. Perception of the outside world is obviously
useful for guiding action, but why should our internal physiological
condition be built into our conscious lives from the ground up?
Answering this question takes us back in history once again, but this time
only to the mid twentieth century and to the neglected amalgam of
computer science, artificial intelligence, engineering, and biology known
as cybernetics.
—
In the 1950s, at the dawn of the computer age, the emerging disciplines
of cybernetics and artificial intelligence (AI) were equally promising and
in many ways inseparable. Cybernetics – from the Greek kybernetes,
meaning ‘steersman’ or ‘governor’ – was described by one of its

founders, the mathematician Norbert Wiener, as ‘the scientific study of
control and communication in the animal and the machine’. The
emphasis of cybernetics was squarely on control, and its primary
applications were in systems – such as guided missiles – that involved
closed-loop feedback from output to input. One conspicuous feature of
this approach was that such systems could appear to have ‘purposes’ or
‘goals’, like hitting a target.
This way of thinking about machines – as potentially having
‘purposes’ – provided a new bridge from the non-living to the living.
Previously, the prevailing view had been that only biological systems
could have goals, could behave according to an inner purpose.||
Cybernetics suggested otherwise, emphasising instead the close
connections between machines and animals. Partly because of this, it
split away from other approaches within AI which emphasised the
offline, disembodied, abstract reasoning that came to be exemplified by
chess-playing computers. By most yardsticks these alternative
approaches won the day, dominating the headlines and the funding
agencies, while cybernetics became increasingly relegated to the
sidelines. Yet even in its relative obscurity, cybernetics delivered many
valuable insights – the significance of which is only now becoming
recognised.
One of these insights comes from a 1970 paper by William Ross
Ashby and Roger Conant, which describes their so-called ‘Good
Regulator Theorem’. The concept is nicely encapsulated by the title of
their paper: ‘Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that
system’.
Think about your central heating system, or – just as good – your airconditioning system. Let’s say this system is designed to keep the
temperature inside your house at a steady 19ºC (about 66ºF). Most
central heating systems work using simple feedback control: if the
temperature is too low, switch on, otherwise switch off. Call this simple
type of system ‘System A’.
Imagine now a more advanced system, ‘System B’. System B is able
to predict how the temperature in the house would respond to the heating
being on or off. These predictions are based on properties of the house –
how big the rooms are, where the radiators are located, what the walls are

made of – as well as on what the weather conditions are like outside.
System B then adjusts the boiler output accordingly.
Thanks to these advanced abilities, System B is better at maintaining
your house at a steady temperature than System A, especially if you have
a complicated house or complicated weather. System B is better because
it has a model of the house, which allows it to predict how the
temperature inside the house will respond to the actions it can take. A
top-end System B might even be able to anticipate upcoming
temperature-related challenges – perhaps a cold day on the way – and
alter the boiler output in advance, so as to guard against even a temporary
drop in warmth. As Conant and Ashby said, every good regulator of a
system must be a model of that system.**
Let’s take this example a step further. Imagine that System B has been
fitted with imperfect ‘noisy’ temperature sensors that only indirectly
reflect the ambient temperature in the house. This means that the actual
temperature cannot be directly ‘read off’ from the sensors; instead, it has
to be inferred on the basis of the sensory data and prior expectations.
System B now has to have a model of (i) how its sensor readings relate to
their hidden causes (the actual temperature in the house), and (ii) how
these causes will respond to different actions, such as adjusting the boiler
or radiator output.
We are now in a position to connect these ideas about regulation to
what we know about predictive perception. System B works by inferring
the ambient temperature from sensor readings, just as our brain makes
best guesses about the causes of its sensory signals in order to infer states
of the world (and body) and how they change over time. But the goal for
System B is not to figure out ‘what’s there’ – in this case the ambient
temperature. The goal is to regulate this inferred hidden cause, to take
action so as to keep the temperature within a comfortable range, and
ideally at a single fixed value. Perception, in this context, is not for
figuring out what’s there, it’s for control and regulation.
Control-oriented perception – the sort of thing implemented by
System B – is therefore a form of active inference, the process by which
sensory prediction errors are minimised through making actions rather
than by updating predictions. As I explained in chapter 5, active
inference depends both on generative models which are able to predict
how the causes of sensory signals respond to different actions, and on

modulating the balance between top-down predictions and bottom-up
prediction errors, so that perceptual predictions can become selffulfilling.
Active inference tells us that predictive perception can be geared
either towards inferring features of the world (or the body) or towards
regulating these features – it can be about finding out things or about
controlling things. What cybernetics brings to the table is the idea that,
for some systems, control comes first. From the perspective of the Good
Regulator Theorem, the entire apparatus of predictive perception and
active inference emerges from a fundamental requirement about what it
takes to adequately regulate a system.
To answer the question of what perceptions of emotion and mood are
for, we need one more concept from cybernetics – that of an essential
variable. Also introduced by Ross Ashby, essential variables are
physiological quantities, such as body temperature, sugar levels, oxygen
levels and the like, that must be kept within certain rather strict limits in
order for an organism to remain alive. By analogy, a desired room
temperature would be the ‘essential variable’ for a central heating
system.
Putting these pieces together, emotions and moods can now be
understood as control-oriented perceptions which regulate the body’s
essential variables. This is what they are for. The experience of fear I
feel as a bear approaches is a control-oriented perception of my body –
more specifically ‘my body in the presence of an approaching bear’ –
that sets in train the actions that are best predicted to keep my essential
variables where they need to be. Importantly, these actions can be both
external movements of the body – like running – and internal ‘interoactions’ such as raising the heart rate or dilating blood vessels.
This perspective on emotions and moods ties them even more closely
to our flesh-and-blood nature. These forms of self-perception are not
merely about registering the state of the body, whether from the outside
or from the inside. They are intimately and causally bound up with how
well we are doing, and how well we are likely to do in the future, at the
business of staying alive.
Crucially, in making this distinction, we also find the reason why
emotions and moods have their characteristic phenomenology.
Experiences of fear, jealousy, joy, and pride are very different, but they

are more similar to each other than any one of them is to a visual
experience, or to an auditory experience. Why is this? The nature of a
perceptual experience depends not only on the target of the
corresponding prediction – perhaps a coffee cup on the table, or a racing
heart – but also on the type of prediction being made. Predictions geared
towards finding out things will have a very different phenomenology
from those geared towards controlling things.
When I look at a coffee cup on my desk, there is the strong perceptual
impression of a three-dimensional object that exists independently of me.
This is the phenomenology of ‘objecthood’, which I introduced in
chapter 6. There, I proposed that objecthood arises in visual experience
when the brain makes conditional predictions about how visual signals
would change, given this-or-that action – like rotating a cup to reveal its
back. Perceptual predictions in this case are geared towards finding out
what’s there, and the relevant actions are those, like rotations, that are
predicted to reveal more about the hidden causes of the sensory signals.
Now consider a more active example: catching a cricket ball. You
might think the best way to do this would be to figure out where the ball
is going to land and run there as fast as possible. But ‘figuring out what’s
there’ is not, in fact, a good strategy, and is not what expert fielders do.
Instead, you should keep moving so that the ball always ‘looks the same’
in a particular way – specifically, so that the angle of elevation of your
gaze to the ball increases, but at a steadily decreasing rate. It turns out
that if you follow this strategy – psychologists call it ‘optic acceleration
cancellation’ – you are guaranteed to intercept the ball.††
This example brings control back into the picture. Your actions – and
your brain’s predictions about their sensory consequences – are not about
finding out where the ball is. They are geared towards controlling how
the ball perceptually appears. Accordingly, your perceptual experience
will not reveal the precise location of the ball in the air, but something
like its ‘catchability’ as you run towards it. Perception in this situation is
a controlling hallucination just as much as it is a controlled hallucination.
This idea has substantial historical pedigree. In the 1970s, the
psychologist James Gibson argued that we often perceive the world in
terms of what he called ‘affordances’. An affordance, for Gibson, is an
opportunity for action – a door for opening, a ball for catching – rather
than an action-independent representation of the ‘way things are’.

Another theory, also from the 1970s but less well known than Gibson’s,
puts even more emphasis on control. According to William Powers’
‘perceptual control theory’, we don’t perceive things in order to then
behave in a particular way. Instead, as in the example of catching a
cricket ball, we behave so that we end up perceiving things in a particular
way. While these early theories were conceptually on track, and are in
line with the ‘action first’ view of the brain that I introduced in chapter 5,
they lacked the concrete predictive mechanisms provided by the
controlled hallucination – or controlling hallucination – view of
perception. They also focused on perception of the outside world, rather
than on the interior of the body.
Anxiety doesn’t have a back, sadness doesn’t have sides, and
happiness is not rectangular. The perceptions of the body ‘from within’
on which affective experiences are built do not deliver experiences of the
shape and location of my various internal organs – my spleen here, my
kidneys over there. There is no phenomenology of objecthood, as when
looking at a coffee cup on the table, nor is there anything like movement
in a spatial frame, as when catching a cricket ball.
The control-oriented perceptions that underpin emotions and moods
are all about predicting the consequences of actions for keeping the
body’s essential variables where they belong. This is why, instead of
experiencing emotions as objects, we experience how well or badly our
overall situation is going, and is likely to go. Whether I’m sitting by my
mother’s hospital bed, or fixing to escape from a bear, the form and
quality of my emotional experiences are the way they are – desolate,
hopeful, panicky, calm – because of the conditional predictions my brain
is making about how different actions might impact my current and
future physiological condition.
—
At the very deepest layers of the self, beneath even emotions and moods,
there lies a cognitively subterranean, inchoate, difficult-to-describe
experience of simply being a living organism. Here, experiences of
selfhood emerge in the unstructured feeling of just ‘being’. This is where
we reach the core of the beast machine theory: the proposal that
conscious experiences of the world around us, and of ourselves within it,

happen with, through, and because of our living bodies. It is at this point
that all of the ideas I’ve been putting forward about perception and self
fall into place. So let’s take things step by step, from the beginning.
The primary goal for any organism is to continue staying alive. This is
true almost by definition – an imperative endowed by evolution. All
living organisms strive to maintain their physiological integrity in the
face of danger and opportunity. This is why brains exist. Evolution’s
reason for providing organisms with brains is not so they can write
poetry, do crossword puzzles, or pursue neuroscience. Evolutionarily
speaking, brains are not ‘for’ rational thinking, linguistic communication,
or even for perceiving the world. The most fundamental reason any
organism has a brain – or any kind of nervous system – is to help it stay
alive, through making sure that its physiological essential variables
remain within the tight ranges compatible with its continued survival.
These essential variables, whose effective regulation determines the
life-status and future prospects of an organism, are the causes of
interoceptive signals. Like all physical properties, these causes remain
hidden behind a sensory veil. Just as with the outside world, the brain has
no direct access to physiological states of the body, and so these states
have to be inferred through Bayesian best guessing.
As with all predictive perception, this best guessing is achieved
through a brain-based process of prediction error minimisation. In the
context of interoception, this is called interoceptive inference. Just as
with vision and with hearing – just as with all perceptual modalities –
interoceptive perception is a kind of controlled hallucination.
Whereas perceptual inference about the world is often geared towards
finding out things, interoceptive inference is primarily about controlling
things – it is about physiological regulation. Interoceptive inference
exemplifies active inference, in that prediction errors are minimised by
acting to fulfil top-down predictions, rather than by updating the
predictions themselves (though this happens too). These regulatory
actions can be external, like reaching for food, or internal, like gastric
reflexes or transient alterations in blood pressure.
This kind of predictive control can support anticipatory responses,
through predictions about future bodily states and their dependence on
this-or-that action. This kind of anticipatory control can be critical for
survival. For example, it may turn out very badly to wait for something

like blood acidity to go out of bounds before mustering an appropriate
response. Again, the relevant actions can be external, internal, or both.
Running away from a bear before being eaten is an example of external
anticipatory regulation. The transient increase in blood pressure needed
to run away effectively, or even to stand up from your desk after you’ve
been working for a while, is an internal anticipatory response.
There is a useful term in physiology to describe this process:
allostasis. Allostasis means the process of achieving stability through
change, as compared to the more familiar term homeostasis, which
simply means a tendency towards a state of equilibrium. We can think of
interoceptive inference as being about the allostatic regulation of the
physiological condition of the body.
Just as predictions about visual sensory signals underpin visual
experiences, interoceptive predictions – whether about the future, or
about the here and now – underpin emotions and moods. These affective
experiences have their characteristic phenomenology because of the
control-oriented and body-related nature of the perceptual predictions
that they depend on. They are controlling hallucinations just as much as
they are controlled hallucinations.
Despite being firmly rooted in physiological regulation, emotions and
moods are still mostly experienced at least in part as relating to things
and situations beyond the self, outside the body. When I feel fear, I am
usually afraid of some thing. But the very deepest levels of experienced
selfhood – the inchoate feeling of ‘just being’ – seem to lack these
external referents altogether. This, for me, is the true ground-state of
conscious selfhood: a formless, shapeless, control-oriented perceptual
prediction about the present and future physiological condition of the
body itself. This is where being you begins, and it is here that we find the
most profound connections between life and mind, between our beast
machine nature and our conscious self.
The final, and crucial, step in the beast machine theory is to recognise
that from this starting point, everything else follows. We are not the beast
machines of Descartes, for whom life was irrelevant to mind. It is exactly
the opposite. All of our perceptions and experiences, whether of the self
or of the world, all are inside-out controlled and controlling
hallucinations that are rooted in the flesh-and-blood predictive machinery

that evolved, develops, and operates from moment to moment always in
light of a fundamental biological drive to stay alive.
We are conscious beast machines, through and through.
—
At the end of the previous chapter I noted that while perceptions of the
world come and go, experiences of selfhood seem to be stable and
continuous over many different timescales. We can now see that this
subjective stability emerges naturally from the beast machine theory.
To effectively regulate the body’s physiological condition, priors on
interoceptive signals need to have high precision, so that they tend to
become self-fulfilling. This key aspect of active inference ensures that
interoceptive best guesses will be drawn towards these priors – to the
desired (predicted) regions of physiological viability. For example, my
body temperature is predicted to be rather constant over time, which –
according to active inference – is why it actually turns out this way. The
experience of the bodily self as being relatively unchanging therefore
stems directly from the need to have precise priors – strong predictions –
about stable bodily states, for the purposes of physiological regulation.
To put it another way: for as long as we live, the brain will never update
its prior belief of expecting to be alive.‡‡
What’s more, given that ‘change’ is itself an aspect of perceptual
inference, the brain may attenuate prior expectations related to perceiving
changes in the condition of the body, in order to further ensure that
physiological essential variables stay where they ought to be. This
implies a form of ‘self-change-blindness’ – a notion also introduced in
the previous chapter. On this view, we might not perceive our
physiological condition as changing even when it does, in fact, change.
Putting these ideas together, we perceive ourselves as stable over time
in part because of a self-fulfilling prior expectation that our physiological
condition is restricted to a particular range, and in part because of a selffulfilling prior expectation that this condition does not change. In other
words, effective physiological regulation may depend on systematically
misperceiving the body’s internal state as being more stable than it really
is, and as changing less than it really does.

Intriguingly, this proposal may generalise to other, higher levels of
selfhood beyond the ground-state of continued physiological integrity.
We will be better able to maintain our physiological and psychological
identity, at every level of selfhood, if we do not (expect to) perceive
ourselves as continually changing. Across every aspect of being a self,
we perceive ourselves as stable over time because we perceive ourselves
in order to control ourselves, not in order to know ourselves.
Complementing this subjective stability, most of us most of the time
also perceive ourselves as being ‘real’. This may seem obvious, but
remember from chapter 6 that the experience of things in the world as
‘really existing’ is not evidence of direct perceptual access to an
objective reality, but a phenomenological property that needs to be
explained. There, I proposed that to be useful for the perceiving
organism, our perceptual best guesses need to be experienced as really
existing out there in the world, rather than as the brain-based
constructions that in truth they are.
The same reasoning holds for the self too. Just as it seems as though
the chair in the corner really is red, and that a minute really has passed
since I started writing this sentence, the predictive machinery of
perception when directed inwardly makes it seem as though there really
is a stable essence of ‘me’ at the centre of everything.
And in the same way that our perceptions of the world can sometimes
lack the phenomenology of being real, the self too can lose its reality.
The experienced reality (and subjective stability) of the self may wax and
wane during illness, and it can be severely attenuated or even abolished
in the psychiatric condition of depersonalisation. The most extreme
examples of self-unreality happen in a rare delusion first described in
1880 by the French neurologist Jules Cotard. The embodied self is so far
gone in the Cotard delusion that sufferers believe they do not exist, or
that they are already dead. Of course, the experience that the self is
unreal does not mean that any essence-of-self has upped and left. It just
means that the control-oriented perceptions associated with the deepest
layers of bodily regulation have gone significantly awry.
—

In putting forward this beast machine theory, I am not claiming to have
demonstrated that life is necessary for consciousness; that there is
something special about flesh, blood, and guts – or biological neurons –
which means that only creatures built from these materials can have
conscious experiences. This may be true, or it may not. Nothing I’ve
said, at least so far, makes a strong case either way, nor is it intended to.
What I am claiming is that in order to understand why our conscious
experiences are the way they are, what experiences of self are like, and
how they relate to experiences of the world, we will do well to appreciate
the deep roots of all perception in the physiology of the living.
Thinking about the material basis of consciousness brings us back,
once again, to the hard problem. The beast machine theory accelerates
the dissolution of this apparent mystery. By extending the controlled
hallucination view to the very deepest layers of selfhood, by revealing
the experience of the-self-as-really-existing as one more aspect of
perceptual inference, the intuitions on which the hard problem implicitly
rest are eroded even further. In particular, the hard-problem-friendly
intuition that the conscious self is somehow apart from the rest of nature
– a really-existing immaterial inner observer looking out onto a material
external world – turns out to be just one more confusion between how
things seem and how they are.
Centuries ago, when Descartes and La Mettrie were forming their
views about the relations between life and mind, it was not the hard
problem that was at issue, but the existence – or non-existence – of the
‘soul’. And – perhaps surprisingly – there are echoes of the soul to be
found in the beast machine story too. This soul is not an immaterial
quiddity, nor a spiritual distillation of rationality. The beast machine view
of selfhood, with its intimate ties to the body, to the persistent rhythms of
the living, returns us to a place liberated from conceits of a computational
mind, before Cartesian divisions of mind and matter, reason and nonreason. What we might call the ‘soul’ in this view is the perceptual
expression of a deep continuity between mind and life. It is the
experience we have when we encounter the deepest levels of embodied
selfhood – these inchoate feelings of ‘just being’ – as really existing. It
seems right to call this an echo of the soul because it revives even more
ancient conceptions of this eternal notion, conceptions – such as the

Ātman in Hinduism – which contemplated our innermost essence more
as breath than as thought.
We are not cognitive computers, we are feeling machines.
Notes
We do not see things: Anaïs Nin, Seduction of the Minotaur (1961), p. 124. Nin attributed the
remark to an ancient Talmudic text.
In the Great Chain: The concept of the Great Chain of Being originated in ancient Greece with
Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus, and became fully developed in western Europe during the
Middle Ages.
annoy the powerful Catholic Church: For a vivid historical account, see George Makari’s Soul
Machine (2016).
prove the existence of a benevolent God: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trademark_argument.
See also Hatfield (2002).
The bodies of both man and beast: Shugg (1968), p. 279. For the original, see The Philosophical
Works of Descartes, trans. E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross (New York, 1955), vol. 1, 114–16,
118.
l’homme machine: La Mettrie (1748).
whether life and mind are continuous: Godfrey-Smith (1996); Maturana & Varela (1980).
sense of the internal: Craig (2002).
Interoceptive sensory signals: Critchley & Harrison (2013).
insular cortex: See Barrett & Simmons (2015) and Craig (2009) for more on the role of the
insular cortex in interoception.
We feel sorry: James (1884), p. 190. The debate between ‘classical’ emotion theorists, who follow
Darwin in proposing innate emotions conserved across species, and ‘constructivists’, who do
not, continues to this day. In the former camp we have the biologist Jaak Panksepp and his
followers. Panksepp argued that a set of basic emotions are instantiated by specific (and
evolutionarily old) neural circuits (Panksepp, 2004); see also Darwin (1872). The latter camp
is exemplified by the neuroscientists Lisa Feldman Barrett and Joe LeDoux, who propose
different versions of the idea that human emotions depend on cognitive evaluations – a
perspective, as we will see, similar to my own. For more on the history of emotion theories,
see Barrett (2016); LeDoux (2012).
still debated: See for example Harrison et al. (2010).
appraisal theories: Schachter & Singer (1962) is the classic reference for appraisal theories.
an inventive study: Dutton & Aron (1974).
it occurred to me: The outlines of this idea first appeared in a 2011 paper (Seth et al., 2011b), and
were refined in a 2013 paper which has since become the standard reference (Seth, 2013). The
core ideas were extended from 2015 onwards into the ‘beast machine’ theory of consciousness
and self: Seth (2015a); Seth (2019a); Seth & Friston (2016); Seth & Tsakiris (2018).
predictions about the causes of interoceptive signals: Damasio’s ideas deeply shaped my own
thinking, especially when it comes to the self; see Damasio (1994, 2000, 2010). Lisa Feldman
Barrett, like me, emphasises the role of interoceptive predictions in emotion – see Barrett &
Satpute (2019) and Barrett & Simmons (2015), as well as her excellent book How Emotions
Are Made (Barrett, 2017).

difficult to test experimentally: See Petzschner et al. (2019). Additional evidence for interoceptive
inference is beginning to accrue from animal studies. For example, two recent experiments
have suggested that neurons in the insular cortex of mice encode something like interoceptive
predictions (Gehrlach et al., 2019; Livneh et al., 2020).
cardio-visual synchrony: See Aspell et al. (2013); Suzuki et al. (2013). In a related study, Micah
Allen and colleagues showed that unexpected physiological arousal influences perception of
visual stimuli – again suggesting an interaction between exteroceptive and interoceptive
processes (Allen et al., 2016). See Park & Blanke (2019) for a review, and Brener & Ring
(2016), Zamariola et al. (2018) for discussions of problems with measuring interoceptive
sensitivity through heartbeat detection. The influence of hypnotic suggestibility on
embodiment was discussed in chapter 8.
the scientific study of control: Wiener (1948).
valuable insights: The history of cybernetics not only shows how academic disciplines which we
now consider as being distinct were once part of a common approach, but also reveals how
science can sometimes meander away from paths that might have delivered extraordinary
riches had they been followed. For more on this I recommend Jean-Pierre Dupuy’s On the
Origins of Cognitive Science: The Mechanization of the Mind (2009).
‘Good Regulator Theorem’: Conant & Ashby (1970).
must be a model: See Seth (2015a) and Seth & Tsakiris (2018) for more on the distinction
between being a model and having a model.
about finding out things or about controlling things: In research papers I refer to the distinction as
being between epistemic (exploratory, information-seeking) and instrumental (goal-directed,
control-oriented) forms of predictive perception: Seth (2019a); Seth & Tsakiris (2018);
Tschantz et al. (2020b).
essential variable: Ashby (1952). For example, human core body temperature must remain
between 32ºC (89.6ºF) and 40ºC (104ºF), otherwise death rapidly follows.
these actions can be both: External and internal actions are distinguished by the type of muscle
involved. External actions depend on the skeletal (striated) muscle system, while internal
(intero-)actions depend on the visceral (smooth) and cardiac muscle systems. These muscle
types are in turn controlled by different branches of the peripheral nervous system (the part of
the nervous system that lies outside the brain and spinal cord). Skeletal muscles are controlled
by the somatic branch, and visceral and cardiac muscles are controlled by the autonomic
branch.
optic acceleration cancellation: See McLeod et al. (2003).
affordances: Gibson (1979).
perceptual control theory: This theory is often summarised by the slogan that control systems
control what they sense, not what they do (Powers, 1973). See Marken & Mansell (2013) for a
more recent articulation of the theory.
There is no phenomenology: I’m not against the metaphorical ascription of shapes to non-visual
experiences. Pains can be sharp or dull. Some tastes are also sharp, and some emotions can be
described this way too – a pang of jealousy, perhaps. But these experiences do not have shapes
in the same way that experienced cups, cats, and coffee tables have shapes.
allostasis: Sterling (2012). See Tschantz et al. (2021) for a computational model of allostatic
interoceptive control.
beast machine theory: See Seth (2013), Seth (2014b), Seth (2015a), Seth (2019), Seth & Friston
(2016), and Seth & Tsakiris (2018) for more technical versions of the beast machine theory
and its components. The theory has many ancestors and influences, to which I cannot do full
justice here. These include Thomas Metzinger’s philosophical examination of the self

(Metzinger, 2003a), and the landmark accounts of predictive processing from Andy Clark and
Jakob Hohwy (Clark, 2016; Hohwy, 2013). The theory owes a particular debt to other
proposals of deep – but different – links between life, body, mind, and consciousness. Here, I
have been strongly influenced by Antonio Damasio (e.g., 1994, 2010), Gerald Edelman (e. g.,
1989), Karl Friston (e.g., 2010), Joe LeDoux (e.g., 2019), and Evan Thompson (e.g., 2014; see
also Varela et al., 1993). For related ideas, see Panksepp (2005); Park & Tallon-Baudry (2014);
Solms (2021); Metzinger’s concept of ‘existence bias’ (Metzinger, 2021), and the work of Lisa
Feldman Barrett (e.g., 2017).
conscious beast machines: A close association between consciousness and physiological
regulation raises new questions about the role of the brainstem – the set of nuclei lying
between the deepest parts of the cerebral hemispheres and the spinal cord. Typically, the
brainstem has been thought of as an ‘enabling factor’ for consciousness, much like a power
cable is an enabling factor for a TV. But the brainstem plays a highly active role in
physiological regulation, leading some to suggest that this is where consciousness arises – with
no need for cortex (Solms, 2021; see also Merker, 2007). I think this is extremely unlikely,
given the weight of explanatory evidence linking cortex (and thalamus) to conscious states.
Having said this, the brainstem may well play a more decisive role in shaping conscious states
than suggested by the power cable analogy – see Parvizi & Damasio (2001) for a nuanced
view.
systematically misperceiving: It is interesting to consider whether self-change-blindness is
attenuated during illness or injury, when it might be useful for the brain to more accurately
perceive what’s going on in the body. There is a new subfield of cognitive neuroscience which
deals with questions like this, called ‘computational psychosomatics’ (Petzschner et al., 2017).
not in order to know ourselves: The Greeks had this down already. While Socrates is associated
with the phrase ‘know thyself’, the Stoics emphasised the importance of equanimity and selfcontrol. Advocates of perceptual control theory might go further still, to say that we regulate
our physiological condition in order to perceive ourselves as stable.
a rare delusion: Cotard (1880).
gone significantly awry: One possible way the self may lose its reality is by the underlying
generative models failing to encode a rich repertoire of conditional or counterfactual
interoceptive predictions concerning how actions affect physiological regulation. This is by
analogy with how visual conditional predictions may underlie the phenomenology of
‘objecthood’. See Seth & Tsakiris (2018).
something special about flesh: The claim that consciousness depends on a specifically biological
property (that a computer made of silicon could never have) is sometimes called biological
naturalism. I do not use this term here because it has been employed in different ways by
different people – see the discussion in Schneider (2019).
*
†

‡
§

Descartes had a pet dog called Monsieur Grat (Mr Scratch) to whom he was apparently
extremely devoted. Then again, he also vivisected rabbits.
Sitting in between exteroception and interoception is proprioception, which refers to the
perception of body position and movement (see chapter 5). It’s important not to confuse
interoception with introspection, which refers to the internal examination of one’s own
mental states.
The insular cortex has its name because of its resemblance to an ‘island’ within the larger
cortical ‘sea’.
In September 2020, I hiked across the notorious Sharp Edge ridge on the mountain
Blencathra, in England’s Lake District. Although no climbing gear is needed, traversing
Sharp Edge is never easy. The ridge’s crest is a jagged mess of slippery rock flanked by

precipitous slopes, and accidents do happen. On this particular crossing I noticed an
upturned stone at the base of the ridge with the words ‘Marry me, Maria?’ written in
chalk. I couldn’t help wonder whether whoever was responsible knew about Dutton and
Aron’s experiment, and was taking advantage.
¶ In moving straight from appraisal theory to interoceptive inference I am skipping over a
large body of intervening work. Antonio Damasio, in particular, has made seminal
contributions showing how the emotion and cognition are related, and how they both
depend on the body. And Lisa Feldman Barrett independently came up with closely
related ideas stressing the importance of interoceptive predictions.
|| I’m talking mainly about post-Enlightenment views. Earlier belief systems, such as
animism, attributed purpose (and life, and spirit) far more liberally.
** One might wonder whether there is a difference between ‘being’ a model and ‘having’ a
model. I think that systems that possess explicit generative models capable of producing
conditional or counterfactual predictions, like System B, can be said to ‘have’ models.
Regulators that are relatively fixed and inflexible, like a simple feedback thermostat such
as System A, may merely ‘be’ a model.
†† If you take this advice literally, the ball will end up hitting you right between the eyes.
‡‡ Another way to think of this is that interoceptive sensory signals will be systematically
‘disattended to’ in order to allow intero-actions to regulate essential variables, in just the
same way that proprioceptive sensory signals are attenuated during external actions – as
discussed in chapter 5.

10
A Fish in Water
In September of 2007 I was on my way from Brighton to Barcelona to
give a talk at a summer school on ‘brain, cognition, and technology’.
Although I was happy to be travelling to such a beautiful city, duties at
home meant I’d arrive too late to attend a three-hour masterclass by the
eminent British neuroscientist Karl Friston on his ‘free energy principle’
and its application to neuroscience. (Friston made an appearance in
chapter 5, when we met his concept of active inference.) I’d been eager
to hear Friston’s seminar because his ideas seemed to capture, in a
mathematically profound albeit complicated way, some of my own
embryonic thoughts about predictive perception and the self.
Resigned to missing his talk, I thought I’d at least be able to find out
what had happened when I got there. But when I turned up at the rooftop
bar later that evening, I was met by a sea of bemused faces. Karl himself
had hopped on a plane back to London immediately after his lecture,
leaving bafflement in his wake. It turned out that after three hours of
detailed mathematics and neuroanatomy, most people were even more
confused than they’d been to begin with.
Part of the problem seemed to be the sheer scale of what was being
proposed. The first thing that strikes you about the free energy principle
is that it’s a really big idea. It brings together concepts, insights, and
methods from biology, physics, statistics, neuroscience, engineering,
machine learning, and elsewhere besides. And its application is by no
means limited to the brain. For Friston, the free energy principle explains
all features of living systems, from the self-organisation of a single
bacterium, to the fine details of brains and nervous systems, to the overall
shape and body plan of animals, reaching even as far as the broad strokes
of evolution itself. It’s as close to a ‘theory of everything’ in biology as
has yet been proposed. It is no wonder that people – me included – were
bewildered.

Fast-forward ten years. In 2017, my colleagues Chris Buckley, Simon
McGregor, Chang-Sub Kim, and I finally published our own review of
‘the free energy principle in neuroscience’, in the Journal of
Mathematical Psychology. Getting there had taken us about nine years
longer than anticipated, but I’m glad we persevered.
At least I think I’m glad, since even after all those hard yards there
remains something strangely inscrutable about it all. Across the internet,
blog posts regularly report on struggles to comprehend Friston’s ideas.
There’s Scott Alexander’s ‘God help us, let’s try to understand Friston on
free energy’. There’s even a parody Twitter account, @FarlKriston,
which posts gnomic statements like ‘I am, whatever I think I am. If I
wasn’t, why would I think I am?’
But the free energy principle is worth it, because accompanying its
apparent inscrutability there is an elegance and simplicity that points to a
deep unity between life and mind, and which in doing so fills out the
beast machine theory of consciousness in several important ways.
And as we’ll see, when boiled down far enough, the free energy
principle – the FEP for short – is not so hard to understand after all.
—
Let’s put aside the mysterious ‘free energy’ for a moment, and begin with
a simple statement about what it means for an organism, indeed for
anything, to exist.
What it means for something to exist is that there must be a difference
– a boundary – between that thing and everything else. If there were no
boundaries there would be no things – there would be nothing.
This boundary must also persist over time, because things that exist
maintain their identity over time. If you add a drop of ink to a glass of
water it will rapidly disperse, colouring the water and losing its identity.
If instead you add a drop of oil, although the oil will spread out over the
surface, it will remain recognisably separate from the water. The oil drop
continues to exist because it has not dispersed itself evenly throughout
the water. After a while, though, it too will lose its identity, just as rocks
eventually erode into dust. Things like oil drops and rocks undoubtedly
exist, because they have an identity that persists for some period of time
– a long time, for rocks. But neither oil drops nor rocks actively maintain

their boundaries, they just get dispersed slowly enough for us to notice
them as existing while this happens.
Living systems are different. Unlike the examples above, living
systems actively maintain their boundaries over time – through moving,
or sometimes even just through growing. They actively contribute to
preserving themselves as distinct from their environment, and this is a
key feature of what makes them living. The starting point for the FEP is
that living systems, simply by virtue of existing, must actively resist the
dispersion of their internal states. By the time you end up as a puddle of
undifferentiated mush on the floor, you are no longer alive.*
Thinking about life this way brings us back to the concept of entropy.
In chapter 2, I introduced entropy as a measure of disorder, diversity, or
uncertainty. The more disordered a system’s states are – like an ink drop
dispersed messily throughout the water – the higher the entropy. For you,
or me, or even a bacterium, our internal states are less disordered when
we are alive than when we decompose into mush. Being alive means
being in a condition of low entropy.
Here’s the problem. In physics, the second law of thermodynamics
tells us that the entropy of any isolated physical system increases over
time. All such systems tend towards disorder, towards a dispersion of
their constituent states over time. The second law tells us that instances
of organised matter, like living systems, are intrinsically improbable and
unstable, and that – in the long run – we’re all doomed. But somehow,
unlike rocks or ink drops, living systems temporarily fend off the second
law, persisting in a precarious condition of improbability. They exist out
of equilibrium with their environment, and this is what it means to ‘exist’
in the first place.
According to the FEP, for a living system to resist the pull of the
second law it must occupy states which it expects to be in. Being a Good
Bayesian, I’m using ‘expect’ in a statistical sense, not in a psychological
sense. It is a very simple, almost trivial idea. A fish in water is in a state
it statistically expects to be in, because most fish are indeed in water
most of the time. It is statistically unexpected to find a fish out of water,
unless that fish is beginning to turn to mush. My body temperature being
roughly 37ºC is also a statistically expected state, compatible with my
continued survival, with my not dissolving into mush.

For any living system, the condition of ‘being alive’ means
proactively seeking out a particular set of states that are visited
repeatedly over time, whether these are body temperatures, heart rates
(the physiological ‘essential variables’ that we met in the previous
chapter), or the organisation of protein complexes and energy flows in a
single-celled bacterium. These are the statistically expected, low-entropy
states that ensure the system stays alive – the kind of states that are
expected, given the creature in question.†
Importantly, living systems are not closed, isolated systems. Living
systems are in continual open interaction with their environments,
harvesting resources, nutrients, and information. It is by taking advantage
of this openness that living systems are able to engage in the energythirsty activity of seeking out statistically expected states, minimising
entropy, and warding off the second law.
From the perspective of an organism, the entropy that matters is the
entropy of its sensory states – those states that bring it into contact with
its environment. Imagine a very simple living system, like a single
bacterium. This bacterium requires a particular nutrient to survive, and it
can sense the concentration of this nutrient in its immediate environment.
By expecting to sense high nutrient concentrations, and by actively
seeking out such expected sensory signals through its movements, this
simple organism will maintain itself in the set of states that define it as
being alive. In other words, sensing high nutrient concentrations is a
statistically expected state for the bacterium, which it proactively seeks to
keep visiting.
According to the FEP, this applies across the board. Ultimately, all
organisms – not just bacteria – stay alive by minimising their sensory
entropy over time, thereby helping to ensure that they remain in the
statistically expected states compatible with survival.
Here’s where we get to the core of the FEP, which addresses the
question of how, in practice, living systems manage to minimise their
sensory entropy. Normally, to minimise a quantity, a system has to be
able to measure it. The problem here is that sensory entropy cannot be
directly detected or measured. A system cannot ‘know’ whether its own
sensations are surprising, simply on the basis of the sensations
themselves. (Here’s an analogy: is the number 6 surprising? It’s
impossible to say, without knowing the context.) This is why sensory

entropy is very different from things like levels of light, or concentrations
of nearby nutrients, which can be directly detected by an organism
through its senses, and used to guide behaviour.
This is where free energy finally enters the story. Don’t worry about
the name, which has its origins in nineteenth-century theories of
thermodynamics. ‡ For our purposes, we can think of free energy as a
quantity which approximates sensory entropy. Crucially, it is also a
quantity that can be measured by an organism – and therefore it is
something that the organism can minimise.
Following the FEP, we can now say that organisms maintain
themselves in the low-entropy states that ensure their continued existence
by actively minimising this measurable quantity called free energy. But
what is free energy from the perspective of the organism? It turns out,
after some mathematical juggling, that free energy is basically the same
thing as sensory prediction error. When an organism is minimising
sensory prediction error, as in schemes like predictive processing and
active inference, it is also minimising this theoretically more profound
quantity of free energy.
One implication of this connection is that the FEP licenses the idea
from the previous chapter that living systems have – or are – models of
their environment. (More specifically, models of the causes of their
sensory signals.) This is because in predictive processing, as we saw in
chapter 5, models are needed to supply the predictions that in turn define
prediction errors. According to the FEP, it is in virtue of having or being
a model that a system can judge whether its sensations are (statistically)
surprising. (If you believe that the number 6 you see comes from the roll
of a die, you can judge exactly how surprising it is.)
These deep connections between the FEP and predictive processing
make appealing sense. Intuitively, by minimising prediction error through
active inference, living systems will naturally come to be in states they
expect – or predict – themselves to be in. Seen this way, the ideas of
predictive perception and controlled (or controlling) hallucination follow
seamlessly from Friston’s ambitious attempt to explain the whole of
biology.
Putting all this together, the picture that emerges is of a living system
actively modelling its world and its body, so that the set of states that
define it as a living system keep being revisited, over and over again –

from the beating of my heart every second to commiserating my birthday
every year. Paraphrasing Friston, the view from the FEP is of organisms
gathering and modelling sensory information so as to maximise the
sensory evidence for their own existence. Or, as I like to say, ‘I predict
myself therefore I am.’
It’s worth noting that minimising free energy – sensory prediction
error – does not mean that a living system can get away with retreating
into a dark and silent room and staying there, staring at the wall. You
might think this would be an ideal strategy, since sensory inputs from the
external environment will become highly predictable. But it is far from
ideal. Over time, sensory inputs signalling other things, like levels of
blood sugar and so on, will start to deviate from their expected values:
you’re going to get hungry if you stay in the dark room too long. Sensory
entropy will start to grow, and non-existence will loom. Complex
systems like living organisms need to allow some things to change in
order for other things to stay the same. We have to move to get out of bed
and make breakfast, and our blood pressure has to rise while doing so, so
that we don’t faint. This matches the anticipatory form of predictive
control – allostasis – that I mentioned in the previous chapter.
Minimising sensory prediction error in the long run means getting out of
the dark room, or at least switching on the lights.
Another common worry about the FEP is that it is not falsifiable, in
the sense that it cannot be proven wrong by experimental data. This is
true, but it is neither unique to the FEP nor particularly problematic. The
best way to think of the FEP is as a piece of mathematical philosophy
rather than a specific theory that can be evaluated by hypothesis testing.
As my colleague Jakob Hohwy puts it, the FEP addresses the question
‘What are the conditions for the possibility of existence?’ in the same
first-principles way that Immanuel Kant raised the question ‘What are the
conditions for the possibility of perception?’ The role of the FEP can be
understood as motivating and facilitating the interpretation of other, more
specific theories; theories which are amenable to refutation by
experiment. The theory of predictive processing, for example, can be
falsified if it turns out that the brain doesn’t use sensory prediction errors
in the process of perceiving. In the end, the FEP will be judged on how
useful it is, not on whether it is empirically true or false itself.§

Let’s summarise the main steps of the FEP. In order for organisms to
stay alive they need to behave so as to maintain themselves in the (low
entropy) states they ‘expect’ to be in. A fish swimming above a coral
reef, searching for food, is proactively seeking expected sensory states
compatible with its continued survival. In general, living systems do this
by minimising a measurable approximation to the entropy of these states,
which is free energy. Minimising free energy requires the organism to
have, or to be, a model of its environment (which includes the body).
Free-energy-minimising organisms then use these models to reduce the
difference between predicted and actual sensory signals, by updating
predictions and by performing actions. Indeed, given plausible
mathematical assumptions, free energy turns out to be exactly the same
thing as prediction error. Altogether, this means that the entirety of
predictive processing and controlled hallucinations, of active inference
and control-oriented perception – and of the beast machine theory too –
can be understood through the lens of the FEP as flowing from a
fundamental constraint on what it means to be alive, on what it means to
exist.
—
In case you’ve found this rapid take on the FEP a bit disorienting, let me
reassure you that it is not necessary to comprehend or accept the FEP in
order to follow the story of controlled hallucinations and beast machines
as I’ve laid it out in previous chapters.¶ The theory that we experience the
world, and the self, through mechanisms of predictive perception that are
rooted in a ‘drive to stay alive’ stands up all by itself. However, the FEP
is worth the journey because it enhances the beast machine theory in at
least three significant ways.
First, the FEP grounds the beast machine theory in the bedrock of
physics, and in particular within a physics relevant to what it means to be
alive. The beast machine’s ‘drive to stay alive’ resurfaces in the FEP as
an even more fundamental imperative to remain in statistically expected
states, to withstand the insistent pull of the second law of
thermodynamics. When a theory can be generalised and grounded this
way, it becomes more compelling, more integrative, and more powerful.

Second, the FEP firms up the beast machine theory by retelling it in
reverse. Over the previous chapters, we began with the challenge of
inferring what the outside world is like from within the vault of a bony
skull, and then following the thread of ideas inwards to the body –
dealing first with experiences of selfhood as perceptual best guesses, and
finally identifying the most deep-seated of these experiences with
control-oriented perception of the body itself. With the FEP, it’s the other
way around. We start with the simple statement that ‘things exist’ and
proceed outwards from there to the body and to the world. Arriving at the
same place from two very different starting points strengthens the
intuition that the underlying story is coherent, and makes clear otherwise
obscure parallels between concepts (for example, free energy and
prediction error).
The third benefit of the FEP lies in the rich mathematical toolbox that
it brings to the table. This toolbox offers many new opportunities to
further develop the ideas I’ve presented in previous chapters. Here’s one
example. When we unpack the mathematics of the FEP in more detail,
we discover that what I really need to do, in order to stay alive, is to
minimise free energy in the future – not just in the here and now. And it
turns out that minimising this long-term prediction error means I need to
seek out new sensations now that reduce my uncertainty about what
would happen next, if I did such-and-such. I become a curious, sensationseeking agent – not someone content to self-isolate in a dark room. The
mathematics of the FEP helps quantify this fine balance between
exploration and exploitation, and this in turn has implications for what
we perceive, since what we perceive is always and everywhere built from
the predictions the brain is making. Insights like this will enable us to do
better experiments, build sturdier explanatory bridges to carry the weight
of these experiments, and bit by bit, bridge by bridge, bring us ever
closer to a satisfying explanation of how mechanisms give rise to minds.
At the same time, the FEP, despite being touted as a ‘theory of
everything’, is not a theory of consciousness. The FEP bears the same
relationship to consciousness as do predictive, Bayesian theories of the
brain: they are theories for consciousness science, in a real problem
sense, and not of consciousness, in the hard problem sense. The FEP
brings new insights and tools to the challenge of explaining
phenomenology in terms of mechanism. And in return, notions of

controlled hallucinations and beast machines endow the austere
mathematics of the FEP with a newfound relevance for consciousness –
and what good is a theory of everything unless it has something to say
about that?
—
Many years after my first unsettling encounter with the FEP, I spent a
few days with Karl Friston – and about twenty other neuroscientists,
philosophers, and physicists – at a small gathering on the Greek island of
Aegina, an hour’s ferry ride from Athens. It was another September, this
time in 2018, not long after my mother’s journey through delirium. Just
as with the trip to Barcelona more than a decade earlier, I’d been looking
forward to some late summer sun along with the science. The plan was to
discuss the FEP with a focus on its relationship to the integrated
information theory of consciousness (IIT) – the equally ambitious theory
we explored in chapter 3. But instead of warm sunshine and blue skies
we were greeted by a major storm, a rare ‘medicane’ which tossed tables
and chairs into the sea and whipped the normally placid Mediterranean
into a white-water fury.
As we sat in the conference annexe, doors slamming in the gusts and
branches lashing the windows, it struck me how extraordinary it was to
be working on consciousness at a time when we had two highly
ambitious and mathematically detailed theories which did not seem to
speak to each other at all. On the face of it, this lack of interaction might
have been disheartening, but I found it a fascinating situation to be in.
The storm continued to batter us throughout the day. Some ideas were
floated, but I had the feeling we were mostly casting around in semidarkness. The FEP and IIT are both grand theories, but they are grand in
different ways. The FEP starts from the simple statement that ‘things
exist’ and derives from this the whole of neuroscience and biology, but
not consciousness. IIT starts from the simple statement ‘consciousness
exists’ and from there launches a direct assault on the hard problem. It’s
not surprising that they often talk past each other.
Two years later, as I put the finishing touches to this book, the two
theories still live in different worlds. But now there are at least some
tentative attempts underway to compare their experimental predictions.

The planning discussions for these experiments – which I’m fortunate to
be part of – have been by turns illuminating and frustrating, largely
because of the dramatically different starting points and explanatory
goals that each theory brings to the table. How these experiments will
turn out remains to be seen. My intuition is that we will learn many
useful things, but that neither the FEP nor the IIT will be explicitly ruled
out as a theory of, or for, consciousness.
My own ideas about controlled hallucinations and beast machines
chart a middle course. They share with the FEP a deep theoretical
grounding in the nature of the self, and they leverage the powerful
mathematical and conceptual machinery of the predictive brain. They
share with IIT a clear focus on the subjective, phenomenological
properties of consciousness – though with the real problem, not the hard
problem, in the cross hairs. Rather than pitting the FEP against IIT, my
hope is that the beast machine theory of consciousness and self provides
a way to bring them together, weaving insights from both into a
satisfying picture of why we are what we are.
Back on Aegina, the meeting ended, as most do, without any great
fanfare. By the time we caught the ferry back to Athens the storm had
abated and the sea was quiet. It had been a difficult decision to make this
trip. I’d missed some personally significant events back in Brighton. But
in the end I’d decided, and standing on the deck in the sunshine I was
now at peace with that decision. I started thinking about how I’d made
the decision, why it’s always so hard, and before long I was thinking
about how anyone makes any decision, and about what it means for us to
feel in control of our choices, of our behaviour, at all.
Once you start thinking about free will, there’s really no stopping.
Notes
explains all features of living systems: Friston has published a large number of papers on the free
energy principle. Two key overviews are Friston (2009, 2010).
our own review: Buckley et al. (2017).
struggles to comprehend: www.lesswrong.com/posts/wpZJvgQ4HvJE2bysy/god-help-us-let-s-tryto-understand-friston-on-free-energy. Other gems include ‘How to read Karl Friston (in the
original Greek)’ by Alianna Maren, www.aliannajmaren.com/2017/07/27/how-to-read-karlfriston-in-the-original-greek, and ‘Free Energy: How the f*ck does that work, ecologically’ by
Andrew Wilson and Sabrina Golonka, psychsciencenotes.blogspot.com/2016/11/free-energyhow-fck-does-that-work.html.

maintain their boundaries: The FEP talks about boundaries in terms of ‘Markov blankets’ – a
concept from statistics and machine learning. For a system described by a set of random
variables, a Markov blanket is a statistical partitioning of the system into ‘internal states’,
‘external states’, and ‘blanket states’, with the blanket separating the internal from the
external. Markov blankets satisfy the requirement that variables inside the blanket (internal
states) are conditionally independent of those outside the blanket (external states), and vice
versa. This means that the dynamics of internal states can be fully predicted from past internal
states and blanket states. See Kirchhoff et al. (2018) for more on Markov blankets and the FEP,
and Bruineberg et al. (2020) for an illuminating criticism.
approximates sensory entropy: Technically, free energy provides an upper bound on a quantity
called surprisal or self-information, which can be thought of as specifying how (statistically)
unexpected an event is. The upper bound means that free energy cannot be less than surprisal.
Surprisal is related to the information-theoretic quantity of entropy in that, under
nonequilibrium steady-state assumptions, the long-term average of surprisal is entropy.
Informally, entropy is like uncertainty – and uncertainty is the average surprise you expect to
encounter.
after some mathematical juggling: More details for the mathematically inclined. Free energy is
defined in terms of two probability distributions: (i) a recognition density which encodes a
current best guess about the state of the environment, and (ii) a generative density which
encodes a probabilistic model of how environmental states shape (generate) sensory inputs.
Here, ‘environment’ refers to the hidden causes of sensory signals, whatever they may be. Free
energy quantities have two components: an energy that corresponds to surprisal, and a relative
entropy that reflects how ‘far apart’ the recognition density is from the true posterior density
(the probability over states of the environment, given sensory inputs). The distance between
these densities is measured by a quantity which in information theory is called the Kullback–
Leibler (KL) divergence. If the recognition and generative densities are assumed to be
Gaussian (and given some other assumptions, for example about independence of timescales),
then free energy maps directly onto precision-weighted prediction error in predictive
processing. Because the smallest measure of ‘far apart’ is zero, this means that free energy is
always bigger than surprisal (i.e., it provides an upper bound). This in turn means that
decreasing free energy must either reduce the divergence between the recognition density and
the true posterior (coming up with better perceptual inferences) or reduce surprisal (by
sampling new sensory inputs).
Paraphrasing Friston: Friston (2010). Jakob Hohwy has neatly termed this process ‘selfevidencing’ (Hohwy, 2014). Mathematically, this view is justified because minimising free
energy is equivalent to maximising (Bayesian) model evidence. Indeed, just as free energy
provides an upper bound on surprisal, it provides a lower bound on model evidence (the socalled evidence lower bound, or ELBO, in machine learning); see Winn & Bishop (2005).
out of the dark room: The ‘dark room problem’ was one of the objections first raised against the
FEP (Friston et al., 2012). It resurfaced again while I was writing this book, and my colleagues
and I rebutted it again. See Seth et al. (2020); Sun & Firestone (2020).
FEP will be judged: Hohwy (2020b), p. 9.
textbook on statistical mechanics: Goodstein (1985), p. 1.
more integrative, and more powerful: One example of this way of augmenting the beast machine
theory takes us back to the notion that living systems maintain a boundary between themselves
and their environment – where a boundary in the FEP is understood in terms of a Markov
blanket (see note to p. 197 above). For Friston, the mere existence or identification of a
Markov blanket directly implies that active inference is happening. See Kirchhoff et al. (2018),
and again Bruineberg et al. (2020) for a critique.

enable us to do better experiments: One example is our research exploring how free energyminimising agents learn adaptively biased perceptual models of their environments (Tschantz
et al., 2020b).
theories for consciousness science: Hohwy & Seth (2020). There have been some other attempts
to link the FEP to consciousness, for example in terms of the temporal depth of generative
models (Friston, 2018); see also Solms (2018); Solms (2021); Williford et al. (2018).
attempts underway: These attempts are in the form of an ‘adversarial collaboration’ in which
proponents of the two theories sign off in advance about whether the outcome of an
experiment will support or undermine their preferred theory. This particular adversarial
collaboration pits IIT against active inference (not the FEP itself). I mentioned one of the
proposed experiments in chapter 3: IIT predicts that inactivating already inactive neurons will
make a difference to conscious perception, whereas active inference does not.
*
†

‡

§
¶

There are some fascinating edge cases which are typically not considered as living, but
which nonetheless seem to actively maintain their identities – consider a tornado, or a
whirlpool.
How can statistically expected states also be improbable? This is possible when a system
inhabits only a restricted repertoire or subset of states – a so-called ‘attracting set’ – out
of a large number of possible states. The attracting set is statistically expected because
that is where the system is usually found, but it is also improbable because there are many
more states outside the set than inside it. There are many more ways of being mush than
there are of being alive.
In thermodynamics, free energy is the amount of energy available for doing work at a
constant temperature. It is ‘free’ in the sense of being ‘available’. The kind of free energy
in the FEP is called ‘variational free energy’ – a term which comes from machine
learning and information theory, but which is closely related to its thermodynamic
equivalent.
Another example of a principle like the FEP is Hamilton’s ‘principle of stationary action’
in physics, which can be used to derive (testable) equations of motion and even general
relativity.
The concepts and mathematics behind the FEP are not simple, even for those with
expertise in the area. The opening lines of a textbook on statistical mechanics warn us:
‘Ludwig Boltzmann, who spent much of his life studying statistical mechanics, died in
1906, by his own hand. Paul Ehrenfest, carrying on the work, died similarly in 1933. Now
it is our turn to study statistical mechanics.’

11
Degrees of Freedom
She bent her finger and then straightened it. The mystery was in the instant before it
moved, the dividing moment between not moving and moving, when her intention took
effect. It was like a wave breaking. If she could only find herself at the crest, she thought,
she might find the secret of herself, that part of her that was really in charge. She brought
her forefinger closer to her face and stared at it, urging it to move. It remained still
because she was pretending … And when she did crook it finally, the action seemed to
start in the finger itself, not in some part of her mind.
IAN McEWAN, Atonement

What is the aspect of being you that you cling to most tightly? For many,
it’s the feeling of being in control of your actions, of being the author of
your thoughts. It’s the compelling but complex notion that we act
according to our own free will.
Ian McEwan finds this complexity even in the simple flexing of a
finger. Thirteen-year-old Briony Tallis feels that her conscious intentions,
for example to bend a finger, cause physical actions – the actual bending
of the finger. The line of apparent causation goes straight from conscious
intention to physical action. And she feels that in this process lies the
very essence of selfhood, of what it is to be her. But when Briony delves
deeper into these feelings, things are not so simple. Where did the
movement start? In the mind, or in the finger? Did the intention – or her
‘self’ – cause the action, or was the experience of intention a result of
perceiving the finger begin to move?
Pondering these questions, Briony Tallis has plenty of company. Few
topics in philosophy and neuroscience have been as consistently
inflammatory as free will. What it is, whether it exists, how it happens,
whether it matters – consensus on these matters has remained elusive to
say the least. There is not even clarity about the experience of free will –
whether it is a singular experience or a class of related experiences,
whether it differs among people, and so on. But amid all this confusion
there is one stable intuition. When we exercise free will there is – in the

words of the philosopher Galen Strawson – a feeling of ‘radical, absolute,
buck-stopping up-to-me-ness in choice and action’. A feeling that the self
is playing a causal role in action in a way that isn’t the case for a merely
reflexive response, such as when you withdraw your hand from the sting
of a nettle. This is why experiences of free will go naturally along with
voluntary actions – whether flexing your finger, deciding to make a cup
of tea, or embarking on a new career.
When I experience ‘freely willing’ an action I am in some sense
experiencing my self as the cause of that action. Perhaps more than any
other kind of experience, experiences of volition make us feel that there
is an immaterial conscious ‘self’ pulling strings in the material world.
This is how things seem.
But experiences of volition do not reveal the existence of an
immaterial self with causal power over physical events. Instead, I believe
that they are distinctive forms of self-related perception. More precisely,
that they are self-related perceptions associated with voluntary actions.
Like all perceptions – whether self-related or world-related – experiences
of volition are constructed according to the principles of Bayesian best
guessing, and they play important – likely essential – roles in guiding
what we do.
Let’s first be clear about what free will is not. Free will is not an
intervention in the flow of physical events in the universe, more
specifically in the brain, making things happen that wouldn’t otherwise
happen. This ‘spooky’ free will invokes Cartesian dualism, demands
freedom from the laws of cause and effect, and offers nothing of
explanatory value in return.
Taking spooky free will off the table means we can also put to rest a
persistent but misguided concern about whether or not determinism is
true. In physics and in philosophy, determinism is the proposal that all
events in the universe are completely determined by previously existing
physical causes. The alternative to determinism is that chance is built into
the universe from the ground up, whether through fluctuations in a
quantum soup or through some other as yet unknown principles of
physics. Whether determinism matters for free will has been the topic of
endless debate. My former boss Gerald Edelman summed it up well with
a provocative one-liner: Free will – whatever you think about it, we’re
determined to have it.

Once spooky free will is out of the picture, it is easy to see that the
debate over determinism doesn’t matter at all. There’s no longer any need
to allow any non-deterministic elbow room for it to intervene. From the
perspective of free will as a perceptual experience, there is simply no
need for any disruption to the causal flow of physical events. A
deterministic universe can chug along just fine. And if determinism is
false, it doesn’t make any difference because exercising free will does not
mean behaving randomly. Voluntary actions neither feel random, nor are
random.
—
In the early 1980s, at the University of California in San Francisco, the
neuroscientist Benjamin Libet performed a series of experiments on the
brain basis of voluntary action which have remained controversial ever
since. Libet took advantage of a well-known phenomenon called the
‘readiness potential’ – a small slope-like EEG signal, originating from
somewhere over the motor cortex, that reliably precedes voluntary
actions. Libet wanted to know whether this brain signal could be
identified not only prior to a voluntary action, but before the person was
even aware of the intention to make the action.
His experimental set-up, shown in the image opposite, was
straightforward. Libet asked his participants to flex their dominant wrist
at a time of their own choosing – to make a spontaneous voluntary
action, just as Briony does in McEwan’s novel. Each time they did this,
he measured the precise time of the movement, while using EEG to
record brain activity both before and after the onset of the movement.
Crucially, he also asked his volunteers to estimate when they experienced
the ‘urge’ to make each movement: the precise moment of conscious
intention, the crest of the breaking wave. They did this by noting the
angular position of a rotating dot on an oscilloscope screen at the time
they experienced the intention to move, and then reporting this position
later on.
The data were clear. After averaging across many trials, the readiness
potential was identifiable hundreds of milliseconds before the conscious
intention to move. In other words, by the time a person is aware of their
intention, the readiness potential has already started ramping up.

A common interpretation of Libet’s experiment is that it ‘disproves
free will’. Indeed, it is clearly bad news for spooky free will (not that
more bad news is needed) because it seems to exclude the possibility that
the experience of volition caused the voluntary action. Libet himself was
sufficiently worried by this implication, that in what now seems like a
desperate rescue attempt, he floated the idea that enough time remained
between the moment of the urge and the resulting action for spooky free
will to intervene and prevent the action from happening. If there isn’t any
genuine (i.e. spooky) free will, Libet thought, maybe there’s still ‘free
won’t’. This is a cute trick, but of course it doesn’t work. Conscious
inhibition is no more a little miracle than the original conscious intention.

Fig. 19: Benjamin Libet’s famous volition experiment.*

Precisely what Libet’s observations say about free will has been
debated for decades. It does seem strange that the readiness potential can
be identified so long before the voluntary action. In brain time, half a

second is a very long time. It wasn’t until 2012 that a new idea and a
clever experiment properly shook things up, when the neuroscientist
Aaron Schurger realised that readiness potentials might not be signatures
of the brain initiating an action, but might instead be artefacts of the way
they are measured.
Readiness potentials are typically measured by looking backward in
time, at the EEG, starting from all those moments at which a voluntary
action actually occurred. What Schurger realised is that, by doing this,
researchers systematically ignore all the other times when voluntary
actions don’t happen. What would the EEG look like at these other times?
Perhaps there is activity similar to readiness potentials going on all the
time, but we don’t see it, because we aren’t looking for it?
This reasoning can be clarified with an analogy. In the ‘high striker’
circus game, punters swing a mallet as hard as they can, sending a small
hockey puck flying upwards towards a bell. If they swing hard enough,
the bell rings; otherwise the puck falls back down in silence. If a circus
scientist examined puck trajectories only for those occasions where the
bell rang, she might mistakenly conclude that a rising puck trajectory (the
readiness potential) always led to the bell ringing (the voluntary action).
To understand how the high striker actually worked, she’d need also to
examine puck trajectories on those occasions when the bell did not ring.
Schurger attacked this problem through a clever modification of the
Libet design in which people continued to make spontaneous voluntary
actions, but were also occasionally prompted, by a loud beep, to make the
same action in a non-voluntary, stimulus-driven way. His key finding was
that when his volunteers were quick to respond to the beep, their EEG
showed what looked like a readiness potential, extending back long
before the beep, even though they hadn’t been preparing any voluntary
action at these times. By contrast, when looking at the EEG preceding
slow responses to the beep, there was little sign of anything resembling a
readiness potential.
Schurger interpreted his data by proposing that the readiness potential
is not a signature of the brain initiating a voluntary action, but a
fluctuating pattern of brain activity that occasionally passes a threshold,
triggering a voluntary action when it does so. This is why, in the standard
Libet experiment, you see a slowly rising slope in the EEG when you
look back in time from the moments when voluntary actions happened.

And this is why, when an action is triggered by a beep, the behavioural
response will be quicker if this fluctuating activity happens to be close to
the threshold and slower if it happens to be far away. This in turn means
that you will see something that looks like a readiness potential if you
look back in time from moments of fast responses – when the activity
happens to be close to threshold – but not when you look back from slow
responses – when the activity is far from threshold.
Schurger’s elegant experiment explains why we see readiness
potentials when we look for the neural signatures of voluntary actions,
and why it is misleading to think of them as being the specific causes of
these actions. But then how should we interpret these fluctuating patterns
of brain activity? My preferred interpretation returns to the idea I started
with: that experiences of volition are forms of self-related perception.
Through the lens of Schurger’s experiment, readiness potentials look a
lot like the activity associated with the brain accumulating sensory data
in order to make a Bayesian best guess. In other words, they are the
neural fingerprints of a special kind of controlled hallucination.
—
I just made a cup of tea.
Let’s use this example to develop the view of experiences of volition
– and voluntary actions too – as self-related perceptions. There are three
defining features that characterise most, if not all, experiences of volition.
The first defining feature is the feeling that I am doing what I want to
do. Being English – at least semi-English – making tea is perfectly
aligned with my psychological beliefs, values, and desires, as well as
with my physiological state at the time and the opportunities –
affordances – of my environment. I was thirsty and tea was available,
nobody was restraining me or force-feeding me hot chocolate, so I made
some tea and drank it. (Of course, if I am being forced to do something
‘against my will’ I may still feel my actions to be voluntary at one level,
but involuntary at another.)
Although making tea was fully consistent with my beliefs, values, and
desires, I did not choose to have these beliefs, values, and desires. I
wanted a cup of tea, but I did not choose to want a cup of tea. Voluntary
actions are voluntary not because they descend from an immaterial soul,

nor because they ascend from a quantum soup. They are voluntary
because they express what I, as a person, want to do, even though I
cannot choose these wants. As nineteenth-century philosopher Arthur
Schopenhauer put it, ‘Man can do what he wills, but he cannot will what
he wills.’
The second defining feature is the feeling that I could have done
otherwise. When I experience an action as voluntary, the character of the
experience is not only that I did X, but that I did X and not Y, even
though I could have done Y.
I made tea. Could I have done otherwise? In one sense, yes. There’s
coffee in the kitchen too, so I could have made coffee. And when making
the tea it certainly seemed to me that I could have made coffee instead.
But I didn’t want coffee, I wanted tea, and since I can’t choose my wants,
I made tea. Given the precise state of the universe at the time, which
includes the state of my body and brain, all of which have prior causes,
whether deterministic or not, stretching all the way back to my origin as a
tea-drinking semi-Englishman and beyond, I could not have done
otherwise. You can’t replay the same tape and expect a different
outcome, apart from uninteresting differences due to randomness. The
relevant phenomenology – the feeling that I could have done otherwise –
is not a transparent window onto how causality operates in the physical
world.
The third defining feature is that voluntary actions seem to come from
within rather than being imposed from somewhere else. This is the
difference between the experience of a reflex action, like the rapid
withdrawal of my foot when I accidentally stub my toe, and its voluntary
equivalent – such as when I deliberately swing my foot backwards as I
prepare to kick a ball. It’s the feeling that Briony Tallis had as she tried to
catch herself at the crest of the breaking wave of her conscious intention
to flex her finger.
Altogether, we perceive an action as being voluntary – as being
‘freely willed’ – when we infer that its causes come predominantly from
within, in a way that is aligned with one’s beliefs and goals, detached
from alternative potential causes in the body or in the world, and that
suggests the possibility of having done otherwise. This is what
experiences of volition feel like from the inside, and also what voluntary
actions look like from the outside.†

The next step is to ask how the brain enables and implements such
actions. Here’s where ‘degrees of freedom’ – the title of this chapter –
enters the story. In engineering and mathematics, a system has degrees of
freedom to the extent that it has multiple ways of responding to some
state of affairs. A rock has basically no degrees of freedom, whereas a
train on a single track has one degree of freedom (go backward or
forward). An ant might have quite a few degrees of freedom in how its
biological control system responds to its environment, while you and I
have vastly more degrees of freedom thanks to the spectacular
complexities of our bodies and our brains.
Voluntary behaviour depends on the competence to control all these
degrees of freedom, in ways that are aligned with our beliefs, values, and
goals, and that are adaptively detached from the immediate exigencies of
the environment and body. This competence to control is implemented by
the brain not by any single region where ‘volition’ resides, but by a
network of processes distributed over many regions in the brain.
Execution of even the simplest voluntary action – flicking a switch to
turn the kettle on, Briony flexing her finger – is underpinned by such a
network. Following the neuroscientist Patrick Haggard, we can think of
this network as implementing three processes: an early ‘what’ process
specifying which action to make, a subsequent ‘when’ process
determining the timing of the action, and a late-breaking ‘whether’
process, which allows for its last-minute cancellation or inhibition.
The ‘what’ component of volition integrates hierarchically organised
sets of beliefs, goals, and values together with perceptions of the
environment, in order to specify a single action out of many possibilities.
I move my hand to the kettle because I am thirsty, I like tea, it is the right
time of day, the kettle is within reach, no wine is available – and so on.
These nested perceptions, beliefs, and goals involve many different brain
regions, with a concentration in the more frontal parts of the cortex. The
‘when’ component specifies the timing of a selected action, and is most
closely associated with the subjective urge to move – the urge that Briony
Tallis wondered about and that Benjamin Libet measured. The brain basis
of this process localises to the same regions that are associated with the
readiness potential. Indeed, gentle electrical brain stimulation of these
regions – in particular the supplementary motor area – can generate a
subjective urge to move, even in the absence of any movement. And the

final ‘whether’ component provides a last-minute check on whether the
planned action should go ahead. When we call off an action at the very
last moment – perhaps I’m out of milk – it’s this process of ‘intentional
inhibition’ that kicks in. These inhibitory processes are also localisable to
more frontal parts of the brain.
These interwoven processes play out in a continual loop spanning the
brain, body, and environment, with no beginning and no end,
implementing a highly flexible ongoing form of goal-oriented behaviour.
This network of processes funnels a large array of potential causes into a
single flow of voluntary actions – and at times their inhibition. And it is
the perception of the operation of this network, its looping through the
body, out into the world, and back again, that underpins subjective
experiences of volition.
What’s more, since action itself is a form of self-fulfilling perceptual
inference, as we saw in chapter 5, perceptual experiences of volition and
the ability to control many degrees of freedom are two sides of the same
prediction machine coin. The perceptual experience of volition is a selffulfilling perceptual prediction, another distinctive kind of controlled –
again perhaps a controlling – hallucination.
There’s one further reason why we experience voluntary actions the
way we do, a reason that puts even more clear air between volition as
perceptual inference and volition as dualistic magic. Experiences of
volition are useful for guiding future behaviour, just as much as for
guiding current behaviour.
As we’ve seen, voluntary behaviour is highly flexible. The
competence to control large numbers of degrees of freedom means that if
a particular voluntary action turns out badly, then the next time a similar
situation arises I might try something different. If on Monday I attempt a
shortcut on my drive to work but arrive late because I get lost, then on
Tuesday I may choose a longer but more reliable route. Experiences of
volition flag up instances of voluntary behaviour so that we can pay
attention to their consequences, and adjust future behaviour so as to
better achieve our goals.
I mentioned earlier that our sense of free will is very much about
feeling we ‘could have done differently’. This counterfactual aspect of
the experience of volition is particularly important for its future-oriented
function. The feeling that I could have done differently does not mean

that I actually could have done differently. Rather, the phenomenology of
alternative possibilities is useful because in a future similar, but not
identical, situation I might indeed do differently. If every circumstance is
indeed identical on Tuesday as on Monday, then I can do no differently
on Tuesday than on Monday. But this will never be the case. The physical
world does not duplicate itself from day to day, not even from
millisecond to millisecond. At the very least, the circumstances of my
brain will have changed, because I’ve had an experience of volition on
Monday and paid attention to its consequences. This, by itself, is enough
to affect how my brain can control my many degrees of freedom when
setting out to work again on Tuesday.‡ The usefulness of feeling ‘I could
have done otherwise’ is that, next time, you might.
And who is the ‘you’? The ‘you’ in question is the assemblage of selfrelated prior beliefs, values, goals, memories, and perceptual best guesses
that collectively make up the experience of being you. Experiences of
volition themselves can now be seen as an essential part of this bundle of
selfhood – they are another species of self-related controlled, or
controlling, hallucination. Altogether, the ability to exercise and to
experience ‘free will’ is the capacity to perform actions, to make choices
– and to think thoughts – that are uniquely your own.
—
So is free will an illusion? We often hear sage pronouncements that it is.
The renowned psychologist Daniel Wegner captured this spirit with his
book The Illusion of Conscious Will, which has remained influential since
its publication nearly twenty years ago. The correct answer to the
question is, of course, ‘It depends.’
Spooky free will certainly isn’t real. In fact, spooky free will may not
even qualify as being illusory. When examined closely, as we’ve seen,
the phenomenology of volition is not so much about immaterial uncaused
causes, it is a self-fulfilling controlling hallucination related to specific
kinds of actions – those actions that seem to come from within. Seen this
way, spooky free will is an incoherent solution to a problem that doesn’t
exist.
And although I’ve concentrated in this chapter on examples in which
voluntary actions are accompanied by vivid experiences of volition, this

is not always the case. When I play the piano, or make a cup of tea, most
of the time these voluntary actions unfold with an automaticity and
fluency that undermines not only the intuition that I somehow cause the
actions, but also the less frequently examined intuition that such actions
even seem to be caused by anything. When people talk about being ‘in
the moment’ or in a ‘state of flow’ – when deeply immersed in an
activity they have extensively practised – the phenomenology of volition
may be entirely absent. Much of the time, our voluntary actions, and our
thoughts – well, they ‘just happen’. When it comes to free will it’s not
only that how things seem is not how they are. How things seem deserves
closer examination too.
From another perspective, free will is not illusory at all. So long as we
have relatively undamaged brains and relatively normal upbringings,
each of us has a very real capacity to execute and to inhibit voluntary
action, thanks to our brain’s ability to control our many degrees of
freedom. This kind of freedom is both a freedom from and a freedom to.
It is a freedom from immediate causes in the world or in the body, and
from coercion by authorities, hypnotists and mesmerists, or social-media
pushers. It is not, however, freedom from the laws of nature or from the
causal fabric of the universe. It is a freedom to act according to our
beliefs, values, and goals, to do as we wish to do, and to make choices
according to who we are.
The reality of this kind of free will is underlined by the fact that it
cannot be taken for granted. Brain injuries, or unlucky draws from the
lotteries of our genes and our environments, can undermine our ability to
exercise voluntary behaviour. People with anarchic hand syndrome make
voluntary actions which they do not experience as being theirs, while
those with akinetic mutism are unable to make any voluntary actions at
all. An awkwardly located brain tumour can transform an engineering
student into a mass school shooter, as happened in the case of Charles
Whitman, the ‘Texas Tower Sniper’, or engender in a previously
blameless teacher a rampant paedophilia – a tendency which disappeared
when the tumour was removed, and returned when it grew back.
The ethical and legal quandaries raised by cases like these are also
real. Charles Whitman did not choose to have the brain tumour that
pressed down on his amygdala, so should he be held responsible for his
actions? Intuitively one might think not, but as we understand more about

the brain basis of volition, is it not a case of ‘brain tumours all the way
down’ for each of us?§ This argument works the other way around, too.
Einstein stated in a 1929 interview that because he didn’t believe in free
will he took credit for nothing.
It is also a mistake to call the experience of volition an illusion. These
experiences are perceptual best guesses, as real as any other kind of
conscious perception, whether of the world or of the self. A conscious
intention is as real as a visual experience of colour. Neither corresponds
directly to any definite property of the world – there is no ‘real red’ or
‘real blue’ out there, just as there is no spooky free will in here – but they
both contribute in important ways to guiding our behaviour, and both are
constrained by prior beliefs and sensory data. Whereas colour
experiences construct features of the world around us, experiences of
volition have the metaphysically subversive content that the ‘self’ has
causal influence in the world. We project causal power into our
experiences of volition in just the same way that we project redness into
our perceptions of surfaces. Knowing that this projection is going on – to
channel Wittgenstein one more time – both changes everything and
leaves everything just the same.
Experiences of volition are not only real, they are indispensable to our
survival. They are self-fulfilling perceptual inferences that bring about
voluntary actions. Without these experiences, we would not be able to
navigate the complex environments in which we humans thrive, nor
would we be able to learn from previous voluntary actions in order to do
better the next time.
Briony Tallis thought that if she could identify the crest of volition’s
breaking wave, she could find herself. The self in question, of course, is a
human self, and there does seem to be something distinctively human
about our ability to deal with complex and changeable environments
through flexible, voluntary behaviour. However, the ability to exercise
free will might come in degrees not only among us humans, but more
widely among the animals we share our world with.
And if the ability to exercise free will extends to other species, what
can be said about the extent of consciousness itself?
It’s time to look beyond the human.
Notes

She bent her finger: McEwan (2000). Hat tip to Patrick Haggard of University College London
for this quote.
There is not even clarity: For an adroit guide to this philosophical minefield see Bayne (2008).
radical, absolute, buck-stopping: Strawson (2008), p. 367.
can chug along: This view, which I subscribe to, expresses what philosophers call compatibilism.
Compatibilism holds that some reasonable conceptions of free will are compatible with the
universe being deterministic. In contrast, libertarian free will (nothing to do with the political
philosophy) is the philosophical version of spooky free will. There are also proponents of socalled hard determinism, which holds that determinism is true and concludes from this that no
reasonable conception of free will can survive. Note that I can be agnostic about whether the
universe is deterministic, which I am, and still be a compatibilist.
neither feel random, nor are: Even if the universe is deterministic at some fundamental level, it
could be that apparently random fluctuations at the level of neurons and synapses play
significant roles in brain function. This is possible, perhaps even likely, but again it doesn’t
matter.
well-known phenomenon: The readiness potential was first recorded in the 1960s by the German
physiologists Hans Kornhuber and Lüder Deecke, who called it the Bereitschaftspotential
(Kornhuber & Deecke, 1965).
experienced the ‘urge’: For philosophers, intentions and urges are different things. I might feel the
urge to hit someone who is annoying me, but I will inhibit this urge because I do not intend to
hurt anyone, or get myself arrested. Intentions are subject to reasons and norms in a way that
urges are not. In simple cases like voluntarily flexing a finger they amount to much the same
thing, and Libet himself mostly used the terms interchangeably.
has already started: Libet (1985). Unsurprisingly, both the readiness potential onset and the
timing of the conscious intention happen prior to the movement itself.
free won’t: Libet et al. (1983).
we don’t see it: The philosopher Al Mele had made a similar conceptual point a few years earlier
(Mele, 2009).
little sign of anything: Schurger et al. (2012).
If I am being forced: See Caspar et al. (2016) for an interesting experiment on this issue.
Man can do what he wills: This quote originates in an essay that Schopenhauer presented to the
Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences in 1839. For a translation see Zucker (2013), p. 531. In
Schopenhauer’s distinction one can see the roots of all addiction.
degrees of freedom: There is an interesting connection to cybernetics here. Ross Ashby, who we
met in chapter 9 for his Good Regulator Theorem and concept of an essential variable, is also
known for his earlier Law of Requisite Variety (Ashby, 1956). This law, or principle, states
that a successful control system must be capable of entering at least as many states as the
environment which is perturbing it. As Ashby put it, ‘only variety can force down variety’. See
Seth (2015a).
Voluntary behaviour depends: Dennett (1984).
three processes: Brass & Haggard (2008); Haggard (2008); Haggard (2019).
stimulation of these regions: Fried et al. (1991). More intense stimulation to this area can generate
both an urge and the corresponding action.
localisable to more frontal parts: Brass & Haggard (2007).
The Illusion of Conscious Will: Wegner (2002).
a problem that doesn’t exist: As Sam Harris put it on a recent podcast, ‘The problem is not merely
that the problem of free will makes no sense objectively, it makes no sense subjectively,
either.’ See https://samharris.org/podcasts/241-final-thoughts-on-free-will/.

being ‘in the moment’: Csikszentmihalyi (1990); Harris (2012).
Brain injuries, or unlucky draws: Della Sala et al. (1991); Formisano et al. (2011).
awkwardly located brain tumour: The case of tumour-induced paedophilia is described in Burns
& Swerdlow (2003). That of Charles Whitman has been related many times, including in a
2011 article in The Atlantic by David Eagleman:
www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2011/07/the-brain-on-trial/308520.
Einstein stated: ‘I claim credit for nothing. Everything is determined, the beginning as well as the
end, by forces over which we have no control. It is determined for the insect as well as for the
star. Human beings, vegetables or cosmic dust, we all dance to a mysterious tune.’ In this
passage, Einstein’s well-known commitment to determinism is on full display. (He also
famously said that ‘God does not play dice with the universe’ – a rejection of the inherent
randomness of quantum mechanics.) However, as we’ve seen, one doesn’t need to embrace
determinism in order to reject spooky free will. The passage comes from an interview
conducted by George Sylvester Viereck, published in the Saturday Evening Post on 26
October 1929 (p. 117).
such as the philosopher Bruce Waller: See Waller (2011) for the view that moral responsibility is
incoherent, and Dennett (1984, 2003) for the alternative. There is an illuminating recent debate
on this issue in Dennett & Caruso (2021).
among the animals: The neurobiologist Björn Brembs has argued that traces of what we call free
will can be found even in very simple creatures, when they behave in variable and apparently
spontaneous ways that also appear to come ‘from within’. Because these behaviours – such as
the unpredictable ‘escape response’ of a cockroach – are beneficial for avoiding predators,
perhaps they reflect the evolutionary origins of how we humans have come to control our
many degrees of freedom. See Brembs (2011).
*

†

‡
§

A volunteer is asked to flex his wrist at a time of his choosing, while noting the position
of the rotating dot on the oscilloscope at the precise time he feels the conscious intention
to move. Other devices measure his muscle activity (EMG) and brain activity (EEG). The
lower panel shows typical average EEG when time-locked to movement onset (0 sec).
The arrows show timing of the conscious urge (A) and onset of the readiness potential
(B).
Sometimes, voluntary actions are also experienced as requiring conscious effort, or
‘willpower’. Writing this footnote, for example, feels effortful. But many self-initiated
voluntary actions require little or no conscious effort. It is therefore important not to
confuse willpower with (the experience of) free will.
Heraclitus: ‘No man ever steps in the same river twice, for it’s not the same river and
he’s not the same man.’
Western legal systems are founded on the principle that criminal liability requires both a
‘guilty act’ (actus rea) and a ‘guilty mind’ (mens rea). When a person’s ability to exercise
free will – to control their degrees of freedom – is injured or repressed in some way, can
they be said to have a ‘guilty mind’? Some, such as the philosopher Bruce Waller, argue
that since we do not decide to have the brains that we have, the very concept of moral
responsibility is incoherent. Another view, which I am attracted to, is that once we pass a
certain threshold of competence to control our degrees of freedom, we can be held
responsible for our actions.

IV
OTHER

12
Beyond Human
From the early ninth century all the way up until the mid 1700s, it was
not uncommon for European ecclesiastical courts to hold animals
criminally responsible for their actions. Pigs were executed or burned
alive, as were bulls, horses, eels, dogs and, on at least one occasion,
dolphins. In the almost two hundred cases documented in E. P. Evans’
1906 history of animal criminal prosecution, pigs were the most common
offenders, probably because they roamed rather freely in medieval
villages. Their crimes varied from eating children to consuming
consecrated biscuits. Sometimes they were charged with abetting –
through their grunting and snorting – the crimes of another; often they
were hanged, and occasionally they were acquitted.

Fig. 20: A sow and her piglets are tried for the murder of a child.
Photograph by Universal History Archive via Getty Images.

Plagues of rodents, locusts, weevils, and other such smaller animals
were less easy to deal with via legal proceedings. In one celebrated
sixteenth-century case, the French lawyer Bartholomew Chassenée
successfully exonerated some rats with the clever argument that they
could not reasonably be expected to turn up to trial, given the dangers
posed to them by the many cats lying in wait along the route. In other
cases, including various weevil infestations, the offending animals were
issued with written orders to leave a property or a barley crop, often on a
specific day and even by a specific hour.
As bizarre as all this seems to our twenty-first-century mindset, the
medieval perspective on animal minds foreshadowed the recent
resurgence of interest in animal consciousness, and in whether
‘personhood’ can extend beyond the human.† The idea that animals could
comprehend, and reasonably submit to, the arcane procedures of
ecclesiastical law was and is borderline insane. But along with this idea
comes a recognition that animals might have conscious experiences, and
might be equipped with minds able – in some sense – to make decisions.
This recognition of conscious minds beyond the human stands in stark
contrast to the Cartesian version of the beast machine story, in which
animals lack the conscious status that goes along with rational minds.
Animals, for many medievals, were certainly beasts. But they were not
the animal-robots of Cartesian dualism. They had their inner universes
too.
These days, it would be strange and almost perverse to argue that only
humans are conscious. But what can we really say about how far the
circle of consciousness extends, and about how different the inner
universes of other animals might be?
—
The first thing to say is that we cannot judge whether an animal is
conscious by its ability – or inability – to tell us that it is conscious.
Absence of language is not evidence for absence of consciousness.
Neither is absence of so-called ‘high-level’ cognitive abilities like
metacognition – which is the ability, broadly speaking, to reflect on one’s
thoughts and perceptions.

Animal consciousness, where it exists, will be different – and in some
cases very different – from our own. Although animal experiments can
shed light on the mechanisms of consciousness in humans, it is unwise to
infer the existence of animal consciousness solely on the basis of
superficial similarity to Homo sapiens. Doing so carries the twin risks of
anthropomorphism – the attribution of humanlike qualities to the nonhuman – and anthropocentrism – the tendency to interpret the world in
terms of human values and experiences. Anthropomorphism encourages
us to see humanlike consciousness where it might not be – such as when
we believe our pet dog really understands what we are thinking.
Anthropocentrism, on the other hand, blinds us to the diversity of animal
minds, preventing us from recognising non-humanlike consciousness
where it might actually be – a myopia exemplified by the Cartesian view
of animals as beast machines.
Above all, we should be suspicious of associating consciousness too
closely with intelligence. Consciousness and intelligence are not the
same thing. Using the latter as a litmus test for the former commits a
number of errors. It falls foul of anthropocentrism: human beings are
intelligent and conscious, therefore for animal X to be conscious it must
also be intelligent. It falls foul of anthropomorphism too: we see
humanlike intelligence in animal X, but not in animal Y, therefore animal
X but not animal Y is conscious. And it encourages a methodological
laziness, since it justifies accepting ‘intelligent’ capabilities like language
and metacognition – which are easier to assess than consciousness itself –
as sufficient for inferring consciousness.
Intelligence is not irrelevant to consciousness. Other things being
equal, intelligence opens up new possibilities for conscious experience.
You can be sad or disappointed without much cognitive competence at
all, but to feel regret – or anticipatory regret – requires enough mental
capability to consider alternative outcomes and courses of action. Even
rats, one study suggests, might experience a rodent version of regret
rather than just disappointment, when things don’t turn out as hoped for.‡
Inferences about non-human consciousness must tread a fine line. We
need to be wary of imposing our anthropocentric view, but at the same
time we have little option but to use humans as a known quantity; a firm
foundation from which to reach outwards. After all, we know that we are
conscious, and we have an increasing grasp on the brain and bodily

mechanisms involved in human consciousness which we can use as a
basis for extrapolation.
The beast machine theory developed in this book makes the case that
consciousness is more closely connected with being alive than with being
intelligent. Naturally, this applies as much to other animals as it does to
us humans. On this view, consciousness may be more widespread than it
would seem, were we to take intelligence as the primary criterion. But it
does not mean that wherever there is life there is also consciousness.
Looking for consciousness beyond the human is like stepping out onto
an icy lake from a frozen shore. One careful step at a time, always
checking how solid the ice feels beneath your feet.
—
Let’s start with mammals – a grouping which includes rats, bats,
monkeys, manatees, lions, hippos, and of course humans too. I believe
that all mammals are conscious. Of course, I don’t know this for sure, but
I am pretty confident. This claim is not based on superficial similarity to
humans, but on shared mechanisms. If you set aside raw brain size –
which has more to do with body size than with anything else –
mammalian brains are strikingly similar across species.
Back in 2005, the cognitive scientist Bernard Baars, myself, and
David Edelman – the son of Gerald Edelman, and an expert on animal
cognition – made a list of the properties of human consciousness which
we thought could be readily tested for in other mammals. We came up
with seventeen distinct properties. This was in some ways an arbitrary
number, but it demonstrated the reasonableness of asking experimentally
testable questions about animal consciousness.
The first properties we thought about had to do with anatomical
features of the brain. In terms of brain wiring, the primary
neuroanatomical features that are strongly associated with human
consciousness are found in all mammalian species. There is a six-layered
cortex, a thalamus that is strongly interconnected with this cortex, a deeplying brainstem, and a host of other shared features – including
neurotransmitter systems – which are consistently implicated, in humans,
in the moment-to-moment flow of conscious experience.

There are common features of brain activity too. Among the most
striking are the changes in brain dynamics as animals fall asleep and
wake up – the dynamics underlying conscious level. In normal waking
states, all mammals show irregular, low-amplitude, and fast electrical
brain activity. And when sleep comes, all mammalian brains switch to
more regular, large-amplitude brain dynamics. These patterns and
changes closely resemble what is seen in humans during waking and
sleeping. General anaesthesia, too, has similar effects across mammalian
species – a widespread breakdown of communication between brain
regions that accompanies total behavioural unresponsiveness.
There are of course many differences as well, especially in patterns of
sleep. Seals and dolphins sleep with half their brain at a time, koalas
sleep for about twenty-two hours each day while giraffes get by on less
than four, and newborn killer whales do not sleep at all in the first month
of life. Nearly all mammals have periods of rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep – though seals do so only while sleeping on land, and dolphins
apparently not at all.
Besides conscious level, there will also be substantial differences in
conscious contents across mammalian species. Much of this variation can
be attributed to differences in dominant kinds of perception. Mice rely on
their whiskers, bats on their echolocating sonar, and naked mole rats on
their acute sense of smell – especially when meeting other naked mole
rats. These differences in perceptual dominance will mean that each
animal will inhabit a distinctive inner universe.§
More intriguing still are differences that relate to experiences of
selfhood. In humans, a notable marker of the development of high-level
self-consciousness, of the sort related to personal identity, is the ability to
recognise oneself in the mirror. In humans, this ‘mirror self-recognition’
ability tends to develop some time between eighteen and twenty-four
months of age. This doesn’t mean that younger infants lack
consciousness – only that their awareness of themselves as an individual,
as separate from others, may not have fully formed before this age.
In animals, the capacity for self-recognition has been extensively
investigated using a test developed by the psychologist Gordon Gallup Jr
in the 1970s. In the classic version of his mirror self-recognition test, an
animal is anaesthetised and then marked, usually with paint or a sticker,
in a place on its body that it cannot normally see. When the anaesthesia

wears off, the animal is allowed to interact with a mirror so that it can see
the mark. If, having looked into the mirror, it spontaneously looks for the
mark on its own body, instead of investigating the mirror image, it has
passed the test. This criterion is based on the reasoning that the creature
has recognised that the mirror image depicts its own body, rather than the
body of another animal.
Who passes the mirror test? Among mammals, some great apes, a few
dolphins and killer whales, and a single Eurasian elephant. A parade of
other mammalian creatures, including pandas, dogs, and various
monkeys, have failed – at least so far. Given how intuitive mirror selfrecognition is for us humans, and how otherwise cognitively competent
many of these non-self-recognising mammals seem to be, this pass list is
remarkably short. There is no convincing evidence that any non-mammal
passes the mirror test, although manta rays and magpies may come close,
and there is currently some controversy about the cleaner wrasse.
Animals could fail the mirror test for many reasons besides lacking
self-recognition abilities. These include not liking mirrors, not
understanding how they work, or even just preferring to avoid eye
contact. Recognising this, researchers are continually developing new
versions of the test that are tuned ever more astutely to different interior
universes – different perceptual worlds. For example, dog selfrecognition can now be tested with ‘olfactory mirrors’ – though they still
don’t do very well (delightfully, cognition in dogs is known as
‘dognition’). It’s possible that as experimental ingenuity continues to
develop, species currently on one side of the line will cross over into the
light of mirror-certified self-awareness. But even if they do, the diversity
of different mirror tests – and the inability of many animals to pass even
heavily species-adapted tests – suggests the likelihood of dramatic
differences in how mammals experience ‘being themselves’.
—
These differences strike me especially forcefully in the case of monkeys.
Although chimpanzees and the great apes are our nearest evolutionary
neighbours, monkeys are not too far away and they’ve long been used in
neuroscientific experiments as ‘primate models’ of humans, especially
when it comes to vision. In some studies, monkeys have even been

trained to deliver ‘reports’ – for example, by pressing a lever – about
whether they ‘saw’ something or not. These experiments can be directly
compared with human studies in which people say what they experience,
or don’t experience, providing a primate equivalent of a key method in
consciousness research.
Given their many similarities to humans, for me there is no doubt that
monkeys possess some kind of conscious selfhood. If you hang around
with monkeys for any length of time, the impression of being among
other conscious entities – other conscious selves – is completely
convincing.
I experienced this in July 2017 when spending a day on Cayo
Santiago, a small island just off the eastern coast of Puerto Rico, in the
Caribbean. Cayo Santiago is also known as ‘monkey island’ because its
only permanent residents are rhesus macaque monkeys – more than a
thousand of them. The population was transplanted there in 1938 from
Kolkata by an eccentric American zoologist, Clarence Ray Carpenter,
who had become tired of trekking all the way to India. As I wandered
around Cayo Santiago on this hot summer day, in the company of the
Yale psychologist Laurie Santos (and a film crew), dozens of monkeys
went about their business, wary but tolerant of us lumbering humans.
When two monkeys took turns to climb a tree and leap from its branches
into a pond below, it seemed to be for no other reason than the sheer
spontaneous pleasure of it. They were having fun.¶
Equally compelling are videos of capuchin monkeys reacting to
deliberate unfairness. In one video, popularised by the primatologist
Frans de Waal, two monkeys are housed in adjacent cages and are
rewarded, one after the other, for passing a small stone to an
experimenter. Monkey One passes the stone through the cage mesh and is
rewarded with a small slice of cucumber, which she happily eats.
Monkey Two does the same thing and is given, not cucumber, but a grape
– a much tastier morsel. Monkey Two eats the grape while Monkey One
looks on. When Monkey One repeats the task and is again given
cucumber, she looks at it, throws it back at the experimenter, and rattles
the cage in apparent indignation.
Having fun and throwing tantrums are powerful intuition pumps.
These behaviours are so distinctive that it’s almost impossible to interpret
them as anything other than the outward manifestation of apparently

humanlike inner states. When we witness a monkey behaving like this,
we intuit the presence not just of another conscious being, but of a
conscious being like us. But here’s the thing. Monkeys, as mentioned,
have consistently failed the mirror test. While monkeys are undoubtedly
conscious, and while I also believe they experience some kind of
selfhood, they are not furry little people.
The shaping of our intuitions by anthropomorphism and
anthropocentrism becomes even more apparent when we look beyond
mammals. Especially when we look as far as some of our most distant
evolutionary relatives.
—
In the summer of 2009 David Edelman and I spent a week with about a
dozen Octopus vulgaris – the common octopus, a species of cephalopod.||
We were visiting the biologist Graziano Fiorito, a leading expert on
cephalopod cognition and neurobiology. Although more than a decade
has since passed, this week still stands as one of the most memorable in
all my years as a scientist.
Fiorito’s octopus lab – part of the renowned Italian research institute,
the Stazione Zoologica – is located in a dank basement directly beneath a
public aquarium in the heart of Naples, a cool refuge from the raucous
summer heat above. My week there was taken up mainly by spending
time with these fascinating creatures, observing how they change shape,
colour, and texture, and paying attention to what they were paying
attention to. One day, as I was trying to match the ever-changing
appearance of one particular octopus to the drawings in Fiorito’s A
Catalogue of Body Patterning in Cephalopoda, I heard a dull splat and a
slither. I’d left a tank lid ajar and the creature was making a break for it.
To this day I am convinced that it had lulled me into a false sense of
security, biding its time until I turned away for a moment too long.
While I was causing havoc, David was putting together an experiment
on visual perception and learning. He would lower differently shaped
objects into the tank of an octopus, some of which were accompanied by
a tasty crab. The idea was to see whether the octopus could learn to
associate particular objects with reward. I don’t remember exactly how
the study turned out, but I do remember one episode very clearly.

Fiorito’s lab was arranged with two rows of tanks lining a central
walkway, one octopus in each tank. (Octopuses are generally not social
creatures and can even be cannibalistic.) On this particular day, David
had chosen a tank in the left-hand row, about halfway along. When I
walked in to see what was going on, I was astonished to see all the
octopuses on the other side of the walkway pressed up against the glass
of their tanks, every one of them staring intently at David while he
repeatedly lowered his objects into his chosen tank. The observing
octopuses seemed to be trying to figure out what was going on for no
other reason than the sheer interest of it.
Being among octopuses, even for a short time, left me with an
impression of an intelligence, and a conscious presence, very different
from any other – and certainly very different from our own human
incarnation. This of course was a subjective impression, necessarily
tainted by the biases of anthropomorphism and anthropocentrism, and
open to the charge of taking intelligence as a sign of sentience. But the
octopus is objectively remarkable too, and spending some time with them
can push our intuitions about how different a non-human consciousness
might be.
The most recent common ancestor of humans and octopuses lived
about 600 million years ago. Little is known about this ancient creature.
Perhaps it was some kind of flattened worm. Whatever it looked like, it
must have been a very simple animal. Octopus minds are not aquatic
spinoffs from our own, or indeed from any other species with a
backbone, past or present. The mind of an octopus is an independently
created evolutionary experiment, as close to the mind of an alien as we
are likely to encounter on this planet. As scuba-diving philosopher Peter
Godfrey-Smith put it, ‘If we want to understand other minds, the minds
of cephalopods are the most other of all.’
The body of an octopus is remarkable enough. The common octopus,
O. vulgaris, has eight arm-like appendages, three hearts pumping blue
blood, an ink-based defence mechanism, and highly developed jet
propulsion. An octopus can change size, shape, texture, and colour at
will, and all at the same time if necessary. It is a liquid animal: apart from
a centrally located bony beak, the octopus is entirely soft-bodied,
allowing it to squeeze through unfeasibly tiny gaps – as I discovered for
myself at the Stazione Zoologica.

These extraordinary bodies are complemented by highly sophisticated
nervous systems. Octopus vulgaris has about half a billion neurons,
roughly six times more than a mouse. Unlike in mammals, most of these
neurons – about three fifths – are in its arms rather than in its central
brain, a brain which nonetheless boasts about forty anatomically distinct
lobes. Also unusual is that octopus brains lack myelin – the insulating
material that in mammalian brains helps long-range neural connections
develop and function. The octopus nervous system is therefore more
distributed and less integrated than mammalian nervous systems of
similar size and complexity. Octopus consciousness – assuming there is
such a thing – may therefore also be more distributed and less integrated,
perhaps even without a having a single ‘centre’ at all.
Octopuses do things differently even at the level of genes. In most
organisms, genetic information in DNA is transcribed directly into
shorter sequences of RNA (ribonucleic acid) which are then used to make
proteins – the molecular workhorses of life. This is a well-established,
textbook-level principle of molecular biology. But in 2017 this principle
was upended by the discovery that RNA sequences in octopuses – and in
a few other cephalopods – can undergo significant editing before being
translated into protein. It’s as if the octopus is able to rewrite parts of its
own genome on the fly. (RNA editing had been previously identified in
other species, but in those instances it plays only a relatively minor role.)
What’s more, for the octopus, much of this RNA editing seems to be
related to the nervous system. Some researchers have suggested that this
prolific genome rewriting ability may partly underlie the impressive
cognitive abilities of octopuses.
And their cognitive abilities certainly are impressive. They can
retrieve hidden objects – usually tasty crabs – from within nested
Plexiglas cubes, find their way through complex mazes, try out a range of
different actions to solve a particular problem, and – as Fiorito himself
has shown at the Stazione – learn simply through observing other
octopuses. Anecdotal reports of octopus behaviour in the wild are even
more astonishing. In one of the more extraordinary examples, footage
from the BBC television series Blue Planet II shows an octopus caught
out in the open, covering itself with shells and other seafloor detritus in
order to hide from a predatory shark.

These feats of cephalopod intelligence are certainly compelling
evidence of a mind at work. But what kind of mind? I’ve already said
that we should not put too much weight on intelligence as a benchmark
for consciousness. So what can be said about what it is like to be an
octopus? To get a handle on this, we need to connect octopus behaviour
to octopus perception.
—
Camouflage is possibly the most otherworldly entry in the catalogue of
cephalopod abilities. Without hard shells for protection, their survival
often depends on their ability to meld into the background. They can
match the colour, shape, and texture of their surroundings so completely
that you or I, along with many potential predators, would find the animal
essentially invisible, even from just a metre or two away.
Octopuses colour-match with their surroundings by making use of an
exquisitely precise system of chromatophores. These are small elastic
sacs, distributed all over the skin, which produce red, yellow, or brown
coloration when they are opened by neural commands originating mainly
from chromatophore lobes in the brain. Exactly how this works is still not
fully understood. Part of the challenge is that octopuses must render
themselves invisible not to other octopuses, but to predators who see the
world in their own distinctive ways. Their camouflage system must
therefore somehow encode knowledge about the visual abilities of these
predators.
What’s even more surprising is that octopuses do all this despite being
colour-blind. The light-sensitive cells in human eyes respond to three
different wavelengths of light, creating from their mixtures a universe of
colour. The cells in octopus eyes, however, contain only one
photopigment. Octopuses can sense the direction of polarisation of light –
just like you or I can when wearing polarising sunglasses – but they
cannot conjure colours out of combinations of wavelength. The same
colour blindness is true for the light-sensitive cells embedded throughout
their skin: it turns out that octopuses can ‘see’ with their skin, as well as
with their eyes. Added to this, octopus chromatophore control is thought
to be ‘open-loop’, meaning that the neurons in the chromatophore lobe
do not generate any obvious internal copy of the signals sent out to the

chromatophores in the skin. The central brain might not even know what
its skin is doing.
It’s hard to wrap one’s head around what this means for how an
octopus might experience its world, and its body within that world. Its
own skin will change colour in ways that it cannot itself see and which
are not even relayed to its brain. And some of these adaptations may
happen through purely local control, in which an arm senses its own
immediate environment and changes its appearance without the central
brain ever getting involved. The human-centred assumption that we can
see and feel what’s happening to our own bodies just doesn’t apply. It’s
not surprising that octopuses show no signs of passing the mirror test.
Along with vision, octopuses share some of the other classic sensory
modalities with mammals and other vertebrates. They can taste, smell,
and touch – and they can hear too, though not very well. There’s still
bizarreness to contend with, because octopuses can taste with their
suckers as well as with their central mouth parts. This again points to a
remarkable decentralisation of mind in these creatures.
The idea of a decentralised consciousness is particularly challenging
when it comes to experiences of body ownership. As we saw in chapter
8, in humans this aspect of conscious selfhood can be altered surprisingly
easily, by tricking the brain into changing its Bayesian best guess about
what is, and what is not, part of the body. Keeping track of the body is
hard enough for us humans with our four limbs constrained by just a few
joints. For an octopus, with its eight highly flexible arms furling and
unfurling in several directions at once, the challenge is formidable. And
just as sensation is partly devolved to these arms, so is control. Octopus
arms behave like semi-autonomous animals: a severed octopus arm can
still execute complex action sequences, like grasping pieces of food, for
some time after being separated from the body.
These degrees of freedom and decentralised control together pose an
intimidating challenge for any central brain trying to maintain single,
unified perception of what is, and what is not, part of its body. Which is
why octopuses may not even bother. As odd as it sounds, what it is like to
be an octopus may not include an experience of body ownership in
anything like the sense in which it applies to humans and other mammals.
This doesn’t mean that octopuses do not distinguish ‘self’ from
‘other’. They clearly do – and they need to. For a start, they need to avoid

getting tangled up with themselves. The suckers on an octopus arm will
reflexively grip onto almost any passing object, yet they will not grip
onto other arms from the same octopus, nor onto its central body. This
demonstrates that octopuses are able, in some way, to discriminate what
is their body from what is not.
It turns out that this ability depends on a simple but effective system
of taste-based self-recognition. Octopuses secrete a distinctive chemical
throughout their skin. This chemical serves as a signal that can be
detected by the suckers, so that they do not reflexively attach. In this
way, an octopus can tell what in the world is part of itself, and what is
not, even though it doesn’t necessarily know where its body is in space.
This discovery was established in a series of admittedly macabre
experiments in which researchers offered detached octopus arms other
detached arms either with the skin on or with the skin removed. The
detached arms would readily grip onto the arms from which the skin had
been removed, but would never grip onto the intact arms.**
What this means for experiences of embodiment in an octopus is hard
for us mammals to imagine. The octopus as a whole might have only a
hazy perception of the what and where of its body, though it would
probably not experience this perception as being hazy. And there might
even be something it is like to be an octopus arm.
—
Octopuses push hard at our intuitions about how different animal
consciousness might be from our own. But in leaping straight from
monkeys to cephalopods we’ve skipped over an enormous menagerie.
Away from the safe shores of mammalian consciousness there lies a vast
expanse of potential animal awareness, ranging from parrots to singlecelled paramecia. Contemplating this terrain, let’s return to the more
fundamental question of which animals are likely to have any kind of
conscious experience at all – those animals for which the ‘lights are on’,
even if the light is just a glimmer.
Birds make a pretty strong case for sentience. Avian brains, while
significantly different from mammalian brains, nevertheless have an
organisation which can be mapped quite closely onto the mammalian
cortex and thalamus. Many bird species are also strikingly intelligent.

Parrots can count, cockatoos can dance, and scrub jays can stash food
according to their future needs. While these examples of smartness
suggest that some birds may enjoy complicated states of consciousness,
remember that intelligence is not a litmus test for awareness. Non-foodhiding, non-speaking, non-dancing birds likely have conscious
experiences too.
As we move further out, the evidence becomes sparser and sketchier,
and inferences about consciousness more tentative. Instead of basing
these inferences on similarity to mammalian brains and behaviours, a
better strategy might be to adopt the beast machine perspective – mine,
not the Cartesian version – which traces the origin and function of
conscious perception to physiological regulation, and to preservation of
the integrity of the organism. This suggests that one place to look for
evidence of awareness is in how animals respond to supposedly painful
events.
This strategy is not only scientifically sensible, it is also motivated by
ethical imperatives. Decisions about animal welfare should be based not
on similarity to humans, nor on whether some arbitrary threshold of
cognitive competence is exceeded, but on the capacity for pain and
suffering. And while there are infinitely many ways in which living
creatures may suffer, the most widely shared likely involve basic
challenges to their physiological integrity.
To the extent that it has been looked for, there is widespread evidence
for adaptive responses to painful events among animal species. Most
vertebrates (animals with backbones) will tend to an injured body part.
Even the tiny zebrafish will pay a ‘cost’ to access pain relief upon injury,
shifting from a natural environment to a barren, brightly lit tank when
that tank is suffused with analgesia. Whether this implies that fish are
conscious – and there are many types of fish – is unclear, but it is
certainly suggestive.
What about insects? Ants do not limp when a leg is damaged.
However, their hard-bodied exoskeletons might be less susceptible to
pain, and insect brains do possess forms of the opiate neurotransmitter
system that is commonly associated with pain relief in other animals. A
recent study found that the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster displays a
post-injury hypersensitivity to previously non-painful stimuli in a way
that resembles ‘chronic pain’ in humans. And, remarkably, anaesthetic

drugs seem to be effective across all animals, from single-celled critters
all the way to advanced primates.
All of this is suggestive, none of it is conclusive.
At some point, it becomes difficult to say anything substantive. My
intuition – and it is no more than an intuition – is that there will be some
animals which do not participate in the circle of consciousness at all. One
reason I feel this way is because even in mammals, with our complex
brains and finely honed perceptual systems geared towards preserving
physiological integrity, unconsciousness remains rather easy to achieve.
Conscious experience is central to our lives, but this doesn’t mean its
biological basis is straightforward. By the time we reach the nematode
worm with its paltry 302 neurons I find it difficult to ascribe any
meaningful conscious status – and the single-celled paramecium just
doesn’t make the grade.
—
Setting aside its inevitable uncertainties, the study of animal
consciousness delivers two profound benefits. The first is a recognition
that the way we humans experience the world and self is not the only
way. We inhabit a tiny region in a vast space of possible conscious
minds, and the scientific investigation of this space so far amounts to
little more than casting a few flares out into the darkness. The second is a
newfound humility. Looking out across the wild diversity of life on
Earth, we may value more – and take for granted less – the richness of
subjective experience in all its variety and distinctiveness, in ourselves
and in other animals too. And we may also find renewed motivation to
minimise suffering wherever, and however, it might appear.
I started this chapter by arguing that consciousness and intelligence
are not the same thing, and that consciousness has more to do with being
alive than with being smart. I want to finish with an even stronger claim.
Not only can consciousness exist without all that much intelligence – you
don’t have to be smart to suffer – but intelligence can exist without
consciousness too.
The possibility of being smart without suffering brings us to the final
leg of our journey through consciousness science. It’s time to talk about

artificial intelligence, and about whether there could ever be conscious
machines.
Notes
history of animal criminal prosecution: Evans (1906).
animal-robots of Cartesian dualism: Descartes’ views on animals were published in the
seventeenth century and so partly co-existed with these medieval beliefs and practices. The
Cartesian view became dominant later on, as the Enlightenment took hold across Europe.
absence of so-called ‘high-level’ cognitive abilities: Advocates of ‘higher-order thought’ theories
of consciousness (which I described briefly in chapter 1) might disagree with this. See Brown
et al. (2019).
animals as beast machines: At the opposite extreme to Descartes, Darwin adopted a strongly
anthropomorphic perspective, especially regarding the expression of emotions in animals
(Darwin, 1872). His assumption of a conserved set of emotions across many species licensed
the use of animal experiments to study human emotions, a line of work later taken up by Jaak
Panksepp and others, and became baked into contemporary culture in the form of ‘hard-wired’
or ‘basic’ emotions associated with specific facial expressions, as in the work of Paul Ekman
(1992). As explained in chapter 9, this ‘basic emotion’ view has been challenged by
contemporary ‘constructivists’ such as Lisa Feldman Barrett and Joe LeDoux, who, like me,
emphasise the role of top-down interpretations in forming conscious content. See Barrett
(2016); LeDoux (2012).
Even rats, one study suggests: See Steiner & Redish (2014), p. 1001.
wherever there is life: The biologist Ernst Haeckel coined the term ‘biopsychism’ in 1892 to
describe the view that all and only living things are sentient – as distinct from the panpsychist
view that consciousness is a property of all forms of matter. See Thompson (2007).
set aside raw brain size: A more sophisticated measure than raw brain size is the encephalisation
quotient, which is a measure of relative brain size, taking body size into account. There is
much discussion about whether the encephalisation quotient is a reliable predictor of cognitive
ability across species (Herculano-Houzel, 2016; Reep et al., 2007). However, there is little
reason to take either brain size or encephalisation quotient as a marker of the presence of
consciousness across species.
seventeen distinct properties: Seth et al. (2005).
similar effects across mammalian species: Kelz & Mashour (2019).
seals … and dolphins: Lyamin et al. (2018); Walker (2017).
distinctive inner universe: Uexküll (1957).
developed by the psychologist Gordon Gallup Jr: Gallup (1970).
some great apes: As reported in a paper with one of my all-time favourite titles: ‘Another gorilla
(Gorilla gorilla gorilla) recognizes himself in a mirror’ (Posada & Colell, 2007).
no convincing evidence: For a review see Gallup & Anderson (2020). The cleaner wrasse debate
is recounted in Kohda et al. (2019) and de Waal (2019).
dognition: Gallup & Anderson (2018).
monkeys have even been trained: Cowey & Stoerig (1995).
a primate equivalent: Boly et al. (2013).
transplanted there in 1938: Kessler & Rawlins (2016).
In one video: www.ted.com/talks/frans_de_waal_do_animals_have_morals.

failed the mirror test: One study found that rhesus monkeys can pass the mirror test after several
weeks of being trained to do so (L. Chang et al., 2017). But passing the test after extensive
training is very different from the spontaneous use of mirrors for self-recognition.
A Catalogue of Body Patterning in Cephalopoda: Borrelli et al. (2006). Taking this wonderful but
extremely heavy book home totally broke my Ryanair baggage allowance.
mind of an alien: In 2015, I was invited to write a book chapter on ‘alien consciousness’. After
fretting for some time, I decided to write about actually existing octopuses instead of
speculating about potentially existing aliens (Seth, 2016a). The parallel between octopuses and
aliens has also been explored in Denis Villeneuve’s artful 2016 film Arrival.
If we want to understand other minds: Godfrey-Smith (2017), p. 10.
octopus brains lack myelin: Hochner (2012); Shigeno et al. (2018).
Octopus consciousness: Carls-Diamante (2017).
Some researchers have suggested: Liscovitch-Brauer et al. (2017).
their cognitive abilities: Fiorito & Scotto (1992). See also D. B. Edelman & Seth (2009); Mather
(2019); and, for a classic text on cephalopod behaviour, Hanlon & Messenger (1996).
octopus caught out in the open: www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p05nzfn1. There is similarly
impressive footage in the 2020 documentary My Octopus Teacher by Pippa Ehrlich and James
Reed, which features a filmmaker – Craig Foster – who develops a surprisingly close
relationship with an octopus.
meld into the background: The marine biologist Roger Hanlon has captured many examples of
octopus camouflage on video. Here’s one of the best: www.youtube.com/watch?
v=JSq8nghQZqA.
central brain might not even know: Mather (2019); Messenger (2001).
octopuses can taste with their suckers: van Giesen et al. (2020).
macabre experiments: Nesher et al. (2014).
animals for which the ‘lights are on’: See D. B. Edelman & Seth (2009) and D. B. Edelman et al.
(2005) for more on non-mammalian consciousness.
Many bird species: Clayton et al. (2007); Jao Keehn et al. (2019); Pepperberg & Gordon (2005);
Pepperberg & Shive (2001).
likely have conscious experiences: Intriguingly, while bird brains have something similar to
mammalian cortex (called the ‘pallium’), they lack any equivalent to the corpus callosum,
which connects the two cortical hemispheres in mammals. Birds might therefore represent a
kind of ‘natural split brain’, raising questions about the unity of avian consciousness (Xiao &
Gunturkun, 2009). Noah Strycker’s The Thing with Feathers (2014) is a lovely introduction to
avian cognition and behaviour.
As we move further out: For excellent treatments of the evolution of consciousness, see Feinberg
& Mallatt (2017); Ginsburg & Jablonka (2019); LeDoux (2019).
Decisions about animal welfare: See Birch (2017) for a useful overview, motivated by the
argument that we should give animals the ‘benefit of the doubt’ when evidence is inconclusive
(an argument known more formally as the ‘precautionary principle’). Notably, the European
Union decided in 2010 to include cephalopods under animal welfare legislation (directive
2010/63/EU).
insect brains do possess: Entler et al. (2016).
fruit fly: Khuong et al. (2019).
effective across all animals: Kelz & Mashour (2019).
possible conscious minds: Jonathan Birch, Alexandra Schnell, and Nicola Clayton usefully
suggest the term ‘consciousness profile’ for characterising interspecies variation in conscious

experience. They propose five dimensions of variation: perceptual richness, evaluative
richness, unity, temporality, and selfhood. See Birch et al. (2020).
†

I will use the word ‘animal’ as a shorthand for ‘non-human’ animals. Humans are
animals too.
‡ In a 2014 study, rats had to decide between different options which were associated with
different levels of reward. When they chose an option which delivered less reward than
expected, they were more likely to look back at the option not chosen. The researchers
interpreted this as a behavioural sign of regret, though it is far from clear what – if
anything – the rats were actually feeling.
§ The world as experienced by an animal is often called the Umwelt for that animal – a
term introduced by the ethologist Jakob von Uexküll.
¶ Shortly after our visit, Cayo Santiago – along with much of Puerto Rico – was devastated
by Hurricane Maria. Thankfully, most of the monkeys survived. Much of the research
infrastructure, however, was destroyed. The footage we recorded features in the 2018
documentary The Most Unknown (www.themostunknown.com).
|| Cephalopods include octopuses, squid, and cuttlefish, as well as comparatively simple
creatures like nautilus, among roughly eight hundred extant species. The term
‘cephalopod’ translates literally as ‘head-foot’, which is unfortunate for octopuses, which
have arm-like appendages rather than feet attached to the head.
** These experiments are not quite as awful as they sound. Octopuses do not seem to notice
much when an arm is removed, and the severed arms grow back quite quickly. Of course,
this does not mean that you should do experiments like these without extremely good
reason.

13
Machine Minds
In Prague, in the late sixteenth century, Rabbi Judah Loew ben Bezalel
took clay from the banks of the Vltava River and from this clay shaped a
humanlike figure – a golem. This golem – which was called Josef, or
Yoselle – was created to defend the rabbi’s people from anti-Semitic
pogroms, and apparently did so very effectively. Once activated by
magical incantation, golems like Josef could move, were aware, and
would obey. But with Josef something went terribly wrong and its
behaviour changed from lumpen obedience into violent monstering.
Eventually the rabbi managed to revoke his spell, upon which his golem
fell into pieces in the synagogue grounds. Some say its remains lie
hidden in Prague to this day, perhaps in a graveyard, perhaps in an attic,
perhaps waiting, patiently, to be reactivated.
Rabbi Loew’s golem reminds us of the hubris we invite when
attempting to fashion intelligent, sentient creatures – creatures in the
image of ourselves, or from the mind of God. It rarely goes well. From
the monster in Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein to Ava in Alex Garland’s Ex
Machina, by way of Karel Čapek’s eponymous robots, James Cameron’s
Terminator, Ridley Scott’s replicants in Blade Runner, and Stanley
Kubrick’s HAL, these creations almost always turn on their creators,
leaving in their wake trails of destruction, melancholy, and philosophical
confusion.
Over the last decade or so, the rapid rise of AI has lent a new urgency
to questions about machine consciousness. AI is now all around us, built
into our phones, our fridges, and our cars, powered in many cases by
neural network algorithms inspired by the architecture of the brain. We
rightly worry about the impact of this new technology. Will it take away
our jobs? Will it dismantle the fabric of our societies? Ultimately, will it
destroy us all – whether through its own nascent self-interest, or because
of a lack of programming foresight which leads to the Earth’s entire
resources being transformed into a vast mound of paperclips? Running

beneath many of these worries, especially the more existential and
apocalyptic, is the assumption that AI will – at some point in its
accelerating development – become conscious. This is the myth of the
golem made silicon.
What would it take for a machine to be conscious? What would the
implications be? And how, indeed, could we even distinguish a conscious
machine from its zombie equivalent?
—
Why might we even think that a machine – an artificial intelligence –
could become aware? As I just mentioned, it is quite common – though
by no means universal – to think that consciousness will emerge naturally
once machines pass some as yet unknown threshold of intelligence. But
what drives this intuition? I think that two key assumptions are
responsible, and neither is justifiable. The first assumption is about the
necessary conditions for anything to be conscious. The second is about
what is sufficient for a specific thing to be conscious.
The first assumption – the necessary condition – is functionalism.
Functionalism says that consciousness doesn’t depend on what a system
is made out of, whether wetware or hardware, whether neurons or silicon
logic gates – or clay from the Vltava River. Functionalism says that what
matters for consciousness is what a system does. If a system transforms
inputs into outputs in the right way, there will be consciousness. As I
explained in chapter 1, there are two separate claims here. The first is
about independence from any particular substrate or material, while the
second is about the sufficiency of input–output relations. Most of the
time they go together, but sometimes they can come apart.
Functionalism is a popular view among philosophers of mind, and is
often accepted as a default position by many non-philosophers too. But
this does not mean it is correct. For me, there are no knock-down
arguments either for or against the position that consciousness is
substrate-independent, or that it is solely a matter of input–output
relations, of ‘information processing’. My attitude towards functionalism
is one of suspicious agnosticism.
For artificially intelligent computers to become conscious,
functionalism would have to be true. This is the necessary condition. But

functionalism being true is, by itself, not enough: information processing
by itself is not sufficient for consciousness. The second assumption is
that the kind of information processing that is sufficient for
consciousness is also that which underpins intelligence. This is the
assumption that consciousness and intelligence are intimately, even
constitutively, linked: that consciousness will just come along for the
ride.
But this assumption is also poorly supported. As we saw in the
previous chapter, the tendency to conflate consciousness with intelligence
traces to a pernicious anthropocentrism by which we over-interpret the
world through the distorting lenses of our own values and experiences.
We are conscious, we are intelligent, and we are so species-proud of our
self-declared intelligence that we assume that intelligence is inextricably
linked with our conscious status and vice versa.
Although intelligence offers a rich menu of ramified conscious states
for conscious organisms, it is a mistake to assume that intelligence – at
least in advanced forms – is either necessary or sufficient for
consciousness. If we persist in assuming that consciousness is
intrinsically tied to intelligence, we may be too eager to attribute
consciousness to artificial systems that appear to be intelligent, and too
quick to deny it to other systems – such as other animals – that fail to
match up to our questionable human standards of cognitive competence.
Over the last few years, these assumptions about necessity and
sufficiency have been dressed up and pushed out of the door by a host of
other concerns and misapprehensions, giving the prospect of artificial
consciousness an urgency and an apocalyptic gloss that it doesn’t really
deserve.
Here are some of them. There is the worry that AI – whether
conscious or not – is on a runaway path to overtake human intelligence,
bootstrapping itself beyond our comprehension and our control. This is
the so-called ‘Singularity’ hypothesis, popularised by the futurist Ray
Kurzweil and motivated by the extraordinary growth in raw
computational resources over the last few decades. Where are we on this
exponential curve? The problem with exponential curves – as many of us
learned during the recent coronavirus pandemic – is that wherever you
stand on them, what’s ahead looks impossibly steep and what’s behind
looks irrelevantly flat. The local view gives no clue to where you are.

Then there are our Promethean fears that our creations will turn on us in
some way or another – fears which have been recognised, repackaged,
and sold back to us by any number of science fiction movies and books.
Finally, there is the unfortunate fact that the term ‘consciousness’ is often
bandied about with an unhelpful sloppiness when it comes to the
capabilities of machines. For some people – including some AI
researchers – anything that responds to stimulation, that learns
something, or that behaves so as to maximise a reward or achieve a goal
is conscious. To me this is a nonsensical overextension of what ‘being
conscious’ reasonably means.
Mix all these ingredients together and it is hardly surprising that many
people think that conscious AI is just around the corner, and that we
should be very worried about what happens when it arrives. The
possibility cannot be ruled out completely. If the Singularity-mongers do
turn out to be right then we should indeed be worried. But from where we
stand now, the prospect is extremely unlikely. Much more likely is a
situation of the sort illustrated below. Here, consciousness is not
determined by intelligence, and intelligence can exist without
consciousness. Both come in many forms and both are expressed along
many different dimensions – meaning that there is not one single scale
for either consciousness or intelligence.

Fig. 21: Consciousness and intelligence are separable and multidimensional.
The positions of animals and machines (real and imaginary) are illustrative.

In this depiction, you’ll notice that current AI is located quite low on
the intelligence scale. This is because it’s unclear whether current AI
systems are intelligent in any meaningful sense. Much of today’s AI is
best described as sophisticated machine-based pattern recognition,
perhaps spiced up with a bit of planning. Whether intelligent or not, these
systems do what they do without being conscious of anything.
Projecting into the future, the stated moonshot goal of many AI
researchers is to develop systems with the general intelligence
capabilities of a human being – so-called ‘artificial general intelligence’,
or ‘general AI’. And beyond this point lies the terra incognita of postSingularity intelligence. But at no point in this journey is it warranted to
assume that consciousness just comes along for the ride. What’s more,
there may be many forms of intelligence that deviate from the humanlike,
complementing rather than substituting or amplifying our speciesspecific cognitive toolkit – again without consciousness being involved.
It may turn out that some specific forms of intelligence are impossible
without consciousness, but even if this is so, it doesn’t mean that all
forms of intelligence – once exceeding some as yet unknown threshold –
require consciousness. Conversely, it could be that all conscious entities
are at least a little bit intelligent, if intelligence is defined sufficiently

broadly. Again, this doesn’t validate intelligence as the royal road to
consciousness.
Just making computers smarter is not going to make them sentient.
But this does not mean that machine consciousness is impossible. What if
we were to try to design in consciousness from the outset? If not
intelligence, what would it take to build a conscious machine?
—
Answering this question depends on what you think is sufficient for a
system to be conscious, and this depends on which theory of
consciousness you subscribe to. It is therefore not surprising that there
are many views about what it would take for a machine to be conscious.
At the more liberal end of the spectrum are those who believe, in line
with functionalism, that consciousness is simply a matter of the right
kind of information processing. This information processing need not be
identical with ‘intelligence’, but it is information processing nonetheless,
and therefore is the sort of thing that can be implemented in computers.
For example, according to a proposal in the journal Science in 2017, a
machine could be said to be conscious if it processes information in ways
that involve ‘global availability’ of the information, and that allow ‘selfmonitoring’ of its performance. The authors equivocate about whether
such a machine would actually be conscious or merely behave as if it
were conscious, but the underlying claim is that nothing more is needed
for consciousness than information processing of the right kind.
A stronger claim about conscious machines has been made by
advocates of integrated information theory (IIT). As we saw in chapter 3,
IIT claims that consciousness simply is integrated information, and that
the amount of integrated information produced by a system is fully
determined by properties of its internal mechanisms – by its ‘cause–effect
structure’. According to IIT, any machine that generates integrated
information, whatever it is made out of, and no matter what it might look
like from the outside, will have some degree of consciousness. However,
IIT also leaves open the possibility that machines might appear to an
external observer to be conscious, or intelligent, or perhaps both, but
have mechanisms that generate no integrated information at all, and
therefore be lacking in consciousness altogether.

Neither of these theories identifies consciousness with intelligence,
but both allow that machines satisfying some specific conditions –
information processing of the right kind, or non-zero integrated
information – would be conscious. But to accept these implications, it is
of course necessary to accept the theories too.
—
The beast machine theory grounds experiences of world and self in a
biological drive towards physiological integrity – towards staying alive.
What does this theory say about the possibility of conscious machines?
Imagine a near-future robot with a silicon brain and a humanlike
body, equipped with all kinds of sensors and effectors. This robot is
controlled by an artificial neural network designed according to the
principles of predictive processing and active inference. The signals
flowing through its circuits implement a generative model of its
environment, and of its own body. It is constantly using this model to
make Bayesian best guesses about the causes of its sensory inputs. These
synthetic controlled (and controlling) hallucinations are geared, by
design, towards keeping the robot in an optimal functional state – to keep
it, by its own lights, ‘alive’. It even has artificial interoceptive inputs,
signalling its battery levels and the integrity of its actuators and synthetic
muscles. Control-oriented best guesses about these interoceptive inputs
generate synthetic emotional states that motivate and guide its behaviour.
This robot behaves autonomously, doing the right thing at the right
time to fulfil its goals. In doing so, it gives the outward impression of
being an intelligent, sentient agent. Internally, its mechanisms map
directly onto the predictive machinery which I’ve suggested underlies
basic human experiences of embodiment and selfhood. It is a silicon
beast machine.
Would such a robot be conscious?
The unsatisfying but honest answer is that I don’t know for sure, but
probably not. The beast machine theory proposes that consciousness in
humans and other animals arose in evolution, emerges in each of us
during development, and operates from moment to moment in ways
intimately connected with our status as living systems. All of our
experiences and perceptions stem from our nature as self-sustaining

living machines that care about their own persistence. My intuition – and
again it’s only an intuition – is that the materiality of life will turn out to
be important for all manifestations of consciousness. One reason for this
is that the imperative for regulation and self-maintenance in living
systems isn’t restricted to just one level, such as the integrity of the whole
body. Self-maintenance for living systems goes all the way down, even
down to the level of individual cells. Every cell in your body – in any
body – is continually regenerating the conditions necessary for its own
integrity over time. The same cannot be said for any current or nearfuture computer, and would not be true even for a silicon beast machine
of the sort I just described.
This shouldn’t be taken to imply that individual cells are conscious, or
that all living organisms are conscious. The point is that the processes of
physiological regulation that underpin consciousness and selfhood in the
beast machine theory are bootstrapped from fundamental life processes
that apply ‘all the way down’. On this view, it is life, rather than
information processing, that breathes the fire into the equations.
—
Even if actually conscious machines are far away – if indeed they are
possible at all – there is still plenty to worry about. In the nearish future,
it is entirely plausible that developments in AI and robotics will deliver
new technologies that give the appearance of being conscious, even if
there are no conclusive reasons to believe that they actually are
conscious.
In Alex Garland’s 2014 film Ex Machina, reclusive billionaire tech
genius Nathan invites hotshot programmer Caleb to his remote hideout to
meet Ava, the intelligent, inquisitive robot he has created. Caleb’s task is
to figure out whether Ava is conscious, or whether she – it – is merely an
intelligent robot, with no inner life at all.
Ex Machina draws heavily on the Turing test, the famous yardstick for
assessing whether a machine can think. In one incisive scene, Nathan is
quizzing Caleb about this test. In the standard version of the Turing test,
as Caleb knows, a human judge interrogates both a candidate machine
and another human, remotely, by exchanging typed messages only. A
machine passes the test when the judge consistently fails to distinguish

between the human and the machine. But Nathan has something far more
interesting in mind. When it comes to Ava, he says, ‘the challenge is to
show you that she’s a robot – and see if you still feel she has
consciousness.’
This new game transforms the Turing test from a test of intelligence
into a test of consciousness, and as we now know, these are very different
phenomena. What’s more, Garland shows us that the test is not really
about the robot at all. As Nathan puts it, what matters is not whether Ava
is a machine. It is not even whether Ava, though a machine, has
consciousness. What matters is whether Ava makes a conscious person
feel that she (or it) is conscious. The brilliance of this exchange between
Nathan and Caleb is that it reveals this kind of test for what it really is: a
test of the human, not of the machine. This is true both for Turing’s
original test and for Garland’s twenty-first-century consciousnessoriented equivalent. Garland’s dialogue so elegantly captures the
challenge of ascribing consciousness to a machine that the term ‘the
Garland test’ is now itself gaining traction – a rare example of science
fiction feeding back into science.
Many simple computer programs, including chatbots of various kinds,
have now been claimed to ‘pass’ the Turing test because a sufficient
proportion of human judges have been fooled a sufficient proportion of
the time. In one particularly quirky example, also from 2014, ten out of
thirty human judges were misled into thinking that a chatbot pretending
to be a thirteen-year-old Ukrainian boy was in fact a real thirteen-yearold Ukrainian boy. This led to noisy proclamations that long-standing
milestones in AI had finally been surpassed. But of course it is easier to
impersonate a foreign teenager who has poor English than it would be to
successfully impersonate someone of one’s own age, language, and
culture, especially when only remote text interactions are allowed. When
the chatbot won, its response was ‘I feel about beating the turing [sic] test
in quite convenient way.’ By lowering the bar this far, the test becomes
much easier to pass. This was a test of human gullibility, and the humans
failed.
As AI continues to improve, the Turing test may soon be passed
without such artificially low standards. In May 2020, the research lab
OpenAI released GPT-3 – a vast artificial neural network trained on
examples of natural language drawn from a large swathe of the internet.

As well as engaging in chatbot-variety dialogue, GPT-3 can generate
substantial passages of text in many different styles when prompted with
a few initial words or lines. Although it does not understand what it
produces, the fluency and sophistication of GPT-3’s output is surprising
and, for some, even frightening. In one example, published in the
Guardian, it delivered a five-hundred-word essay about why humans
should not be afraid of AI – ranging across topics from the psychology of
human violence to the industrial revolution, and including the
disconcerting line: ‘AI should not waste time trying to understand the
viewpoints of people who distrust artificial intelligence for a living.’
Despite its sophistication, I am pretty sure that GPT-3 can still be
caught out by any reasonably sophisticated human interlocutor. This may
not be true for GPT-4, or GPT-10. But even if a future GPT-like system
repeatedly aces the Turing test, it would be exhibiting only a very narrow
form of (simulated) intelligence – disembodied linguistic exchange –
rather than the fully embodied ‘doing the right thing at the right time’
natural intelligence that we see in humans and in many other animals – as
well as in my hypothetical silicon beast machine.
When it comes to consciousness, there’s no equivalent to the
Ukrainian chatbot, let alone to GPT-whatever. The Garland test remains
pristine. In fact, attempts to create simulacra of sentient humans have
often produced feelings of anxiety and revulsion, rather than the complex
mix of attraction, empathy and pity that Caleb feels for Ava in Ex
Machina.
—
The Japanese roboticist Hiroshi Ishiguro has spent decades building
robots that are as similar as possible to human beings. He calls them
‘Geminoids’. Ishiguro has created Geminoid copies of himself (see
opposite) and his daughter (then six years old), as well as a Geminoid
Japanese-European TV anchorwoman based on a blend of about thirty
different people. Each Geminoid is constructed from detailed 3D body
scans and has pneumatic actuators able to generate a wide range of facial
expressions and gestures. There is precious little AI as such in these
devices – they are all about human mimicry, with possible applications
in, among other things, remote presence or ‘telepresence’. Ishiguro once

used his Geminoid to deliver a forty-five-minute remote lecture to 150
undergraduate students.
Geminoids are undeniably creepy. They are realistic, but not quite
realistic enough. Think of meeting a Geminoid as the opposite of meeting
a cat. With a cat – or an octopus, for that matter – there is an immediate
sense of the presence of another conscious entity, even though visual
appearances are so different. With a Geminoid, the striking but imperfect
physical similarity accentuates feelings of disconnection and otherness.
In one study from 2009, the most common feeling experienced by
visitors meeting a Geminoid was fear.

Fig. 22: Hiroshi Ishiguro with his Geminoid.
Used with permission from ATR Hiroshi Ishiguro
Laboratories.

This kind of reaction exemplifies the so-called ‘uncanny valley’, a
concept originated by another Japanese researcher, Masahiro Mori, in
1970. Mori proposed that as a robot begins to look humanlike, it will

elicit increasingly positive and empathetic reactions from people (think
C-3PO in Star Wars). But once it passes a certain point, where it appears
strikingly human in some ways but falls short in others, these reactions
will turn rapidly to revulsion and fear – the uncanny valley – only
recovering as the resemblance becomes even closer, to the point of
indistinguishability. There are many theories about why the uncanny
valley exists, but there is little doubt that it does.
Although real-world robots find it hard to escape from the uncanny
valley, developments in the virtual world are already clambering back up
the slope and out the other side. Recent advances in machine learning
using ‘generative adversarial neural networks’ – GANNs for short – can
generate photorealistic faces of people who never actually existed (see
opposite).* These images are created by cleverly mixing features from
large databases of actual faces, employing techniques similar to those we
used in our hallucination machine (described in chapter 6). When
combined with ‘deepfake’ technologies, which can animate these faces to
make them say anything, and when what they say is powered by
increasingly sophisticated speech recognition and language production
software, such as GPT-3, we are all of a sudden living in a world
populated by virtual people who are effectively indistinguishable from
virtual representations of real people. In this world, we will become
accustomed to not being able to tell who is real and who is not.
Anyone who thinks that these developments will hit a ceiling before a
video-enhanced Turing test is convincingly passed is likely to be
mistaken. To think this way reveals either a resistant case of human
exceptionalism, a failure of imagination, or both. It will happen. Two
questions remain. The first is whether these new virtual creations will be
able to cross into the real world, traversing the uncanny valley in which
Ishiguro’s Geminoids remain trapped. The second is whether the Garland
test will also fall. Will we feel that these new agencies are actually
conscious, as well as actually intelligent – even when we know that they
are nothing more than lines of computer code?
And if we do feel that way, what will that do to us?

Fig. 23: Eight faces. These people are not real.

—
The rapid rise of AI – whatever mixture of hype and reality it is fuelled
by – has sparked a resurgent and necessary discussion of ethics. Many
ethical concerns have to do with the economic and societal consequences
of near-future technologies like self-driving cars and automated factory
workers, where significant disruption is inevitable. † There are legitimate
worries about delegating decision-making capability to artificial systems,
the inner workings of which may be susceptible to all kinds of bias and
caprice, and which may remain opaque – not only to those affected, but
also to those who designed them. At the extreme end of the spectrum,
what horror could be unleashed if an AI system were put in charge of
nuclear weapons, or of the internet backbone?
There are also ethical concerns about the psychological and
behavioural consequences of AI and machine learning. Privacy invasion
by deepfakes, behaviour modification by predictive algorithms, and
belief distortion in the filter bubbles and echo chambers of social media
are just a few of the many forces that pull at the fabric of our societies.
By unleashing these forces we are willingly ceding our identities and
autonomy to faceless data-corporations in a vast uncontrolled global
experiment.

Against this background, ethical discussions about machine
consciousness can appear indulgent and abstruse. But they aren’t. These
discussions are necessary, even if the machines in question do not (yet)
have consciousness. When the Garland test is passed, we will share our
lives with entities that we feel have their own subjective inner lives, even
though we may know, or believe, that they do not. The psychological and
behavioural consequences of this are hard to foresee. One possibility is
that we will learn to distinguish how we feel from how we should act, so
that it will seem natural to care for a human but not for a robot even
though we feel that both have consciousness. It is not clear what this will
do to our individual psychologies.
In the TV series Westworld, lifelike robots are developed specifically
to be abused, killed, and raped – to serve as outlets for humanity’s most
depraved behaviours. Could it be possible to torture a robot while feeling
that it is conscious and simultaneously knowing that it is not, without
one’s mind fracturing? With the minds we have now, behaviour like this
would be top-end sociopathic. Another possibility is that the circle of our
moral concern will be distorted by our anthropocentric tendency to
experience greater empathy for entities towards which we feel greater
similarity. In this scenario we may care more about our next-generation
Geminoid twins than we do about other humans, let alone about other
animals.
Of course, not all futures need be so dystopian. But as the footrace
between progress and hype in AI gathers pace, psychologically informed
ethics must play its part too. It is simply not good enough to put new
technology out there and wait to see what happens. Above all, the
standard AI objective of recreating and then exceeding human
intelligence should not be pursued blindly. As Daniel Dennett has
sensibly put it, we are building ‘intelligent tools, not colleagues’ and we
must be sure to recognise the difference.
And then comes the possibility of true machine consciousness. Were
we to wittingly or unwittingly introduce new forms of subjective
experience into the world we would face an ethical and moral crisis on an
unprecedented scale. Once something has conscious status it also has
moral status. We would be obliged to minimise its potential suffering in
the same way we are obliged to minimise suffering in living creatures,
and we’re not doing a particularly good job at that. And for these putative

artificially sentient agents there is the additional challenge that we might
have no idea what kinds of consciousness they might be experiencing.
Imagine a system subject to an entirely new form of suffering, for which
we humans have no equivalent or conception, nor any instincts by which
to recognise it. Imagine a system for which the distinction between
positive and negative feelings does not even apply, for which there is no
corresponding phenomenological dimension. The ethical challenge here
is that we would not even know what the relevant ethical issues were.
However far away real artificial consciousness remains, even its
remote possibility should be given some consideration. Although we do
not know what it would take to create a conscious machine, we also do
not know what it would not take.
In June 2019, the German philosopher Thomas Metzinger called for
an immediate thirty-year moratorium on all research aimed at generating
what he called ‘synthetic phenomenology’, precisely for these reasons. I
was there when he made his announcement. We were both speaking at a
meeting on artificial consciousness hosted by the Leverhulme Centre for
the Future of Intelligence, in Cambridge. Metzinger’s entreaty is difficult
to follow to the letter, since much if not all computational modelling in
psychology could fall under his umbrella, but the thrust of his message is
clear. We should not blithely forge ahead attempting to create artificial
consciousness simply because we think it’s interesting, useful, or cool.
The best ethics is preventative ethics.
In the heyday of vitalism it might have seemed as preposterous to talk
about the ethics of artificial life as the ethics of artificial consciousness
can seem to us today. But here we are, a little over a hundred years later,
with not only a deep understanding of what makes life possible, but many
new tools to modify and even create it. We have gene editing techniques
like CRISPR, which enables scientists to easily alter DNA sequences and
change the function of genes. We even have the capability to develop
fully synthetic organisms built from the ‘genes up’: in 2019, researchers
in Cambridge created a variant of Escherichia coli with a fully synthetic
genome. The ethics of creating new forms of life is suddenly very
relevant indeed.
And perhaps it will be biotechnology, rather than AI, that brings us
closest to synthetic consciousness. Here, the advent of ‘cerebral
organoids’ is of particular significance. These are tiny brain-like

structures, made of real neurons, which are grown from human
pluripotent stem cells (cells which can differentiate into many different
forms). Although not ‘mini brains’, cerebral organoids resemble the
developing human brain in ways which make them useful as laboratory
models of medical conditions in which brain development goes wrong.
Could these organoids harbour a primitive form of bodiless awareness? It
is hard to rule the possibility out, especially when they start to show coordinated waves of electrical activity not unlike those seen in premature
human babies, as one recent study found.
Unlike computers, cerebral organoids are made out of the same
physical stuff as real brains, removing one obstacle to thinking of them as
potentially conscious. On the other hand, they remain extremely simple,
they are completely disembodied, and they do not interact with the
outside world at all (though it is possible to wire them up to cameras and
robotic arms and the like). For my money, while current organoids are
highly unlikely to be conscious, the question will remain disconcertingly
open as the technology develops. This brings us back to a need for
preventative ethics. The possibility of organoid consciousness has ethical
urgency not only because it cannot be ruled out, but because of the
potential scale involved. As the organoid researcher Alysson Muotri has
said, ‘We want to make farms of these organoids.’
—
Why is the prospect of machine consciousness so alluring? Why does it
exert such a pull on our collective imagination? I’ve come to think that it
has to do with a kind of techno-rapture, a deep-seated desire to transcend
our circumscribed and messily material biological existence as the end
times approach. If conscious machines are possible, with them arises the
possibility of rehousing our wetware-based conscious minds within the
pristine circuitry of a future supercomputer that does not age and never
dies. This is the territory of mind uploading, a favourite trope of futurists
and transhumanists for whom one life is not enough.
Some even think we may already be there. The Oxford University
philosopher Nick Bostrom’s ‘simulation argument’ outlines a statistical
case proposing that we are more likely to be part of a highly sophisticated
computer simulation, designed and implemented by our technologically

superior and genealogically obsessed descendants, than we are to be part
of the original biological human race. On this view, we already are virtual
sentient agents in a virtual universe.
Some captivated by the techno-rapture see a fast-approaching
Singularity, a critical point in history at which AI is poised to bootstrap
itself beyond our understanding and outside our control. In a postSingularity world, conscious machines and ancestor simulations abound.
We carbon-based life forms will be left far behind, our moment in the sun
over and done.
It doesn’t take much sociological insight to see the appeal of this
heady brew to our technological elite who, by these lights, can see
themselves as pivotal in this unprecedented transition in human history,
with immortality the prize. This is what happens when human
exceptionalism goes properly off the rails. Seen this way, the fuss about
machine consciousness is symptomatic of an increasing alienation from
our biological nature and from our evolutionary heritage.
The beast machine perspective differs from this narrative in almost
every way. On my theory, as we’ve seen, the entirety of human
experience and mental life arises because of, and not in spite of, our
nature as self-sustaining biological organisms that care about their own
persistence. This view of consciousness and human nature does not
exclude the possibility of conscious machines, but it does undercut the
amped-up techno-rapture narrative of soon-to-be-sentient computers that
propels our fears and permeates our dreams. From the beast machine
perspective, the quest to understand consciousness places us increasingly
within nature, not further apart from it.
Just as it should.
Notes
a golem: In his 1964 book God and Golem, Inc., the polymathic pioneer Norbert Wiener treated
golems as central to his speculations about risks of future AI.
vast mound of paperclips: In the parable of the paperclip maximiser, an AI is designed to make as
many paperclips as possible. Because this AI lacks human values but is otherwise very smart,
it destroys the world in its successful attempt to do so. See Bostrom (2014).
so-called ‘Singularity’ hypothesis: See Shanahan (2015) for a refreshingly sober take on the
Singularity hypothesis.
intelligence can exist without consciousness: It is tempting to say that consciousness and
intelligence are doubly dissociable – that each can exist without the other. But this would not

be quite right. While I believe that intelligence can exist without consciousness, it could be
that consciousness requires a non-zero level of intelligence.
not one single scale: The idea of multidimensional consciousness (and intelligence) recalls
Jonathan Birch and colleagues’ concept of a ‘consciousness profile’ (Birch et al., 2020), as
well as the multidimensional approach to levels of consciousness in humans proposed by Tim
Bayne, Jakob Hohwy, and Adrian Owen (Bayne et al., 2016).
The authors equivocate: Dehaene et al. (2017). Global availability corresponds to the popular
global workspace theory of consciousness, whereas ‘self-monitoring’ captures aspects of
higher-order thought theories. We briefly met both of these theories in chapter 1. The authors
of the Science paper explicitly admit that they may be leaving out the ‘experiential’ component
of consciousness. For me, this is leaving out too much.
machines might appear to be conscious: This possibility arises because IIT accepts one part of
functionalism (substrate independence) but not the other (sufficiency of input–output
mappings). Some mechanisms, notably feedforward artificial neural networks of adequate size,
can implement arbitrarily complex input–output mappings. These mechanisms, implemented
the right way, might give the outward appearance of intelligence and/or consciousness. But
purely feedforward networks generate no integrated information at all – some recurrency or
‘loopiness’ is always needed. IIT therefore licenses the concept of a ‘behavioural zombie’,
which, as I explained in chapter 1, is an artefact that appears conscious from the outside, but
has no consciousness. See Tononi & Koch (2015).
continually regenerating the conditions: These ideas relate closely to the concept of autopoiesis
(pronounced ‘auto-poi-ee-sis’, from the Greek words for ‘self’ and ‘creation’), developed by
Chilean biologist Humberto Maturana. An autopoietic system is one that is capable of
maintaining and reproducing itself, which includes producing the physical components needed
for its continued existence as a system. Although autopoeisis is first and foremost a theory of
the cell, there are intriguing links between cellular autopoiesis and the free energy principle
(see chapter 10). Both suggest a strong continuity between ‘life’ and ‘mind’, which in turn
suggests that there is more to mind (and also to consciousness) than simply what a system
‘does’ (Kirchhoff, 2018; Maturana & Varela, 1980). I was lucky enough to meet Maturana –
who died in May 2021 at the age of ninety-two – in January 2019, in his home city of
Santiago, where we spent time sipping coffee and discussing these ideas in a shady cafe garden
in the Barrio Providencia.
Turing test: In Alan Turing’s original ‘imitation game’, there are two humans of the same gender
and a machine. The machine and one human – the collaborator – are both pretending to be a
human of the opposite gender. The other human has to decide which is the machine and which
is the collaborator (Turing, 1950).
Garland test: This term was coined by Murray Shanahan, whose book Embodiment and the Inner
Life (2010) was one of the inspirations behind Ex Machina.
noisy proclamations: www.reading.ac.uk/news-archive/press-releases/pr583836.html.
When the chatbot won: ‘Eugene Goostman is a real boy – the Turing Test says so’, Guardian Pass
notes, 9 June 2014. See
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2014/jun/09/eugene-goostman-turing-testcomputer-program.
the humans failed: The description of the Turing test as a test of ‘human gullibility’ comes from a
2015 New York Times article by John Markoff, ‘Software is smart enough for SAT, but still far
from intelligent’, New York Times, 21 September 2015. See
www.nytimes.com/2015/09/21/technology/personaltech/software-is-smart-enough-for-sat-butstill-far-from-intelligent.html.

vast artificial neural network: GPT stands for ‘Generative Pre-trained Transformer’ – a type of
neural network specialised for language prediction and generation. These networks are trained
using an unsupervised deep learning approach essentially to ‘predict the next word’ given a
previous word or text snippet. GPT-3 has an astonishing 175 billion parameters and was
trained on some 45 terabytes of text data. See https://openai.com/blog/openai-api/ and for
technical details: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
it does not understand: Of course this depends on what is meant by ‘understanding’. Some might
say that human ‘understanding’ is no different in kind from the sort of ‘understanding’
displayed by GPT-3. The cognitive scientist Gary Marcus argues against this position, and I
agree with him. See www.technologyreview.com/2020/08/22/1007539/gpt3-openai-languagegenerator-artificial-intelligence-ai-opinion/.
a five-hundred-word essay: ‘A robot wrote this entire article. Are you scared yet, human?’,
Guardian Opinion, 8 September 2020. See
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/sep/08/robot-wrote-this-article-gpt-3. It is unclear
how representative this example is.
the most common feeling … was fear: Becker-Asano et al. (2010).
theories about why the uncanny valley exists: Mori et al. (2012).
‘deepfake’ technologies: To ‘deepfake’ is to generate a realistic but fake video, usually of a
human face, using machine learning to combine a source and a target video. In a widely
disseminated example from 2017, the deepfake method was used to create convincing videos
of Barack Obama saying things that he did not say (https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=cQ54GDm1eL0). A series of TikTok videos deepfaking Tom Cruise, released in 2021,
raises the bar substantially (https://www.theverge.com/22303756/tiktok-tom-cruiseimpersonator-deepfake).
vast uncontrolled global experiment: The AI researcher Stuart Russell eloquently describes the
threats posed by current and near-future AI, as well as ways to redesign AI systems to avoid
them, in his book Human Compatible (2019). Nina Schick does a similarly excellent job for
the threat posed by deepfakes (Schick, 2020).
intelligent tools, not colleagues: ‘Philosopher Daniel Dennett on AI, robots and religion’,
Financial Times, 3 March 2017. See https://www.ft.com/content/96187a7a-fce5-11e6-96f83700c5664d30.
immediate thirty-year moratorium: See Metzinger (2021).
creating new forms of life: Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna won the 2020 Nobel
Prize in Chemistry for their contributions to developing the CRISPR technique. The synthetic
E. coli was created in the laboratory of Jason Chin; see Fredens et al. (2019).
co-ordinated waves of electrical activity: Trujillo et al. (2019).
highly unlikely to be conscious: I investigated the possibility of organoid consciousness in a recent
paper with Tim Bayne and Marcello Massimini (Bayne et al., 2020).
ethical urgency: These issues are being taken seriously. In the summer of 2020, I was invited –
along with several other neuroscientists – to speak at a US National Academy joint committee
convened to help establish regulatory and legal frameworks for research involving both
organoids and chimeras (animals genetically modified to express specific human
characteristics). See www.nationalacademies.org/our-work/ethical-legal-and-regulatory-issuesassociated-with-neural-chimeras-and-organoids.
We want to make farms: Carl Zimmer, ‘Organoids are not brains. How are they making brain
waves?’, New York Times, 29 August 2019. See
www.nytimes.com/2019/08/29/science/organoids-brain-alysson-muotri.html.

a favourite trope of futurists: For a measured discussion of the prospects and pitfalls of mind
uploading, see Schneider (2019).
virtual sentient agents: The simulation argument runs like this (Bostrom, 2003). A sufficiently
far-future civilisation that has avoided extinguishing itself would likely have access to vast
computational resources. Some members of this civilisation may be inclined to run detailed
computer simulations of their ancestors. Given that a great many such simulations could be
run, it would therefore be rational for any individual experiencing life now to conclude that
they were more likely to be among the simulated minds than among the original biological
humans. As Bostrom puts it: ‘if we don’t think that we are currently living in a computer
simulation, we are not entitled to believe that we will have descendants who will run lots of
such simulations of their forebears’ (Bostrom, 2003, p. 243). One among many issues I have
with this argument is that it assumes that functionalism is true: that, when it comes to
consciousness, simulation is equivalent to instantiation. As I’ve mentioned before, I don’t
think functionalism is a safe assumption.
*
†

These synthetic faces were generated using thispersondoesnotexist.com.
Some of these technologies are not as new as they seem. My colleague Ryota Kanai
recently offered that ‘a horse is basically a self-driving horse’.

Epilogue

I want to have control,
I want a perfect body,
I want a perfect soul.
RADIOHEAD, ‘Creep’ (1992)

In January 2019, I came face to face with a living human brain for the
first time. Twenty-odd years after I’d first started to research the science
of consciousness, ten years since our laboratory at Sussex had opened its
doors, and three years after my own anaesthesia-induced oblivion with
which this book began. After all this time, gazing at the gently pulsing
grey-white cortical surface, delicately threaded with dark red veins, it
seemed again inconceivable that such a lump of stuff could give rise to
an inner universe of thoughts, feelings, perceptions – to a life lived fully
in the first person. The profound sense of wonder I felt mixed
uncomfortably in my mind with the old joke that a brain transplant is the
only operation for which it’s better to be the donor than the recipient.
I was the guest of Michael Carter, a paediatric brain surgeon working
at the Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, in the west of England. He’d
invited me to observe one of the more dramatic neuro surgical procedures
carried out anywhere. The patient, a child of just over six, was scheduled
for a hemispherotomy. He’d been suffering from severe epilepsy since he
was born. The seizures originated from his right cortical hemisphere,
which had been badly damaged during his premature birth. All standard
anti-seizure medications had failed, so as a last resort the neurosurgeon
was called in.
A hemispherotomy involves complete neural disconnection of the
brain’s dysfunctional right hemisphere. The surgeon enters the brain
through the right-hand side, removes (‘resects’) the temporal lobe, and
then cuts through all the bundles of connections – the white-matter tracts
– that link the right hemisphere with the rest of the brain and body. The
isolated hemisphere remains inside the skull, and is still connected to its
blood supply. It is a living but isolated island of cortex. An extreme
version of more familiar split-brain operation, the idea is that complete

neural disconnection prevents electrical storms originating in the
damaged right hemisphere from spreading to the rest of the brain. If the
operation is carried out early enough, the young brain is often sufficiently
adaptable that the remaining hemisphere can pick up most or all of the
slack. Despite the radical nature of this surgery, and although every case
is different, outcomes are generally good.
This particular operation started at about noon and lasted for a shade
over eight hours. In my own work I can barely last five minutes before
being distracted by an email or the cricket score, or by making another
cup of tea. Michael worked without pause for hour after hour, patiently,
methodically, unrelentingly, supported by a neurosurgical trainee and a
rotating team of assistants. About halfway through, when the trainee
surgeon took a short break, I was invited to scrub in and step up to the
surgical microscope. I had not expected such a privileged view. Peering
into the brightly lit cavities of the child’s brain, I tried to register my
abstract knowledge of different regions and pathways to the welter of
tissue illuminated before me. It made little sense. The crisp cortical
hierarchies and counterflowing weaves of bottom-up and top-down
signalling that I knew from my research were nowhere to be seen. The
brain was newly inscrutable, and I was left in awe both of the
neurosurgeon’s skill and of the material reality of this most magical of
objects. It felt almost transgressive. A curtain had been pulled back
revealing something too intimate to be so openly on view. I was looking
directly into the mechanics of a human self.
—
The surgery went according to plan. Some time after eight o’clock
Michael left the trainee to finish stitching the scalp back together and
took me along to meet the child’s family. They were grateful and
relieved. I wondered what they would have been feeling had they seen
what I’d seen that day.
Later, driving home through the winter darkness, my thoughts
returned to David Chalmers’ description of the hard problem of
consciousness: ‘It is widely agreed that experience arises from a physical
basis, but we have no good explanation of why and how it so arises. Why

should physical processing give rise to such a rich inner life at all? It
seems objectively unreasonable that it should, and yet it does.’
Faced with this mystery, philosophy has provided a range of options,
from panpsychism (consciousness everywhere, more or less) to
eliminative materialism (no consciousness, at least not how we think of
it) and everything in between. But the science of consciousness isn’t
about choosing from a set menu, however swanky the restaurant or
skilled the chef. It’s more like cooking with whatever you can find in the
fridge, where various bits and pieces from philosophy, neuroscience,
psychology, computer science, psychiatry, machine learning, and so on
are combined and recombined in different ways, and turned into
something new.
This is the essence of the real problem approach to consciousness.
Accept that consciousness exists, and then ask how the various
phenomenological properties of consciousness – which is to say how
conscious experiences are structured, what form they take – relate to
properties of brains, brains that are embodied in bodies and embedded in
worlds. Answers to these questions can begin by identifying correlations
between this-or-that pattern of brain activity and this-or-that type of
conscious experience, but they need not and should not end there. The
challenge is to build increasingly sturdy explanatory bridges between
mechanism and phenomenology, so that the relations we draw are not
arbitrary but make sense. What does ‘make sense’ mean in this context?
Again: explain, predict, and control.
Historically, this strategy echoes how our scientific understanding of
life transcended the magical thinking of vitalism by individuating the
properties of living systems, and then accounting for each in terms of
their underlying mechanisms. Life and consciousness are of course
different things, though I hope by now I’ve persuaded you that they are
more intimately connected than at first they might seem. Either way, the
strategy is the same. Instead of attempting to solve the hard problem of
consciousness head on, and rather than sidelining the experiential
qualities of consciousness altogether, the real problem approach offers
genuine hope of reconciling the physical with the phenomenal –
dissolving, not solving the hard problem.
We began with conscious level – the difference between being in a
coma and being wide awake and aware – where we focused on the

importance of measurement. The key point here is that candidate
measures, like causal density and integrated information, are not
arbitrary. Rather, they capture highly conserved properties of all
conscious experiences, namely that every conscious experience is
simultaneously unified and distinct from all other conscious experiences.
Every conscious scene is experienced ‘all of a piece’, and every
experience is the way it is, and not some other way.
We then moved on to the nature of conscious content and in particular
the experience of being a conscious self. I posed a series of challenges to
the way things seem that in each case encouraged us to adopt new, postCopernican perspectives on conscious perception.
The first challenge was to understand perception as an active, actionoriented construction, rather than as a passive registration of an objective
external reality. Our perceived worlds are both less than and more than
whatever this objective external reality might be. Our brains create our
worlds through processes of Bayesian best guessing in which sensory
signals serve primarily to rein in our continually evolving perceptual
hypotheses. We live within a controlled hallucination which evolution
has designed not for accuracy but for utility.
The second challenge turned this insight inwards, to the experience of
being a self. We explored how the self is itself a perception, another
variety of controlled hallucination. From experiences of personal identity
and continuity over time, all the way down to the inchoate sense of
simply being a living body, these pieces-of-selfhood all depend on the
same delicate dance between inside-out perceptual prediction and
outside-in prediction error, though now much of this dance takes place
within the confines of the body.
The final challenge was to see that the predictive machinery of
conscious perception has its origin and primary function not in
representing the world or the body, but in the control and regulation of
our physiological condition. The totality of our perceptions and
cognitions – the whole panorama of human experience and mental life –
is sculpted by a deep-seated biological drive to stay alive. We perceive
the world around us, and ourselves within it, with, through, and because
of our living bodies.
This is my theory of the beast machine, a twenty-first-century version
– or inversion – of Julien Offray de La Mettrie’s ‘l’homme machine’.

And it’s here that the deepest shifts in how to think about consciousness
and selfhood take place.
There is the puzzle that experiences of ‘being a self’ are very different
from experiences of the world around us. Now we can understand them
as different expressions of the same principles of perceptual prediction,
with the differences in phenomen ology tra cing back to differences in the
kinds of prediction that are involved. Some perceptual inferences are
geared towards finding out about objects in the world, while others are all
about controlling the inter ior of the body.
By tying our mental lives to our physiological reality, age-old
conceptions of a continuity between life and mind are given new
substance, buttressed by the sturdy pillars of predictive processing and
the free energy principle. And this deep continuity in turn allows us to
see ourselves in closer relation to other animals and to the rest of nature,
and correspondingly distant from the fleshless calculus of AI. As
consciousness and life come together, consciousness and intelligence are
teased apart. This reorientation of our place in nature applies not only to
our physical, biological bodies, but to our conscious minds, to our
experiences of the world around us and of being who we are.
—
Every time science has displaced us from the centre of things it has given
back far more in return. The Copernican revolution gave us a universe –
one which astronomical discoveries of the last hundred years have
expanded far beyond the limits of human imagination. Charles Darwin’s
theory of evolution by natural selection gave us a family, a connection to
all other living species and an appreciation of deep time and of the power
of evolutionary design. And now the science of consciousness, of which
the beast machine theory is just one part, is breaching the last remaining
bastion of human exceptionalism – the presumed specialness of our
conscious minds – and showing this, too, to be deeply inscribed into the
wider patterns of nature.
Everything in conscious experience is a perception of sorts, and every
perception is a kind of controlled – or controlling – hallucination. What
excites me most about this way of thinking is how far it may take us.
Experiences of free will are perceptions. The flow of time is a perception.

Perhaps even the three-dimensional structure of our experienced world
and the sense that the contents of perceptual experience are objectively
real – these may be aspects of perception too. The tools of consciousness
science are allowing us to get ever closer to Kant’s noumenon, the
ultimately unknowable reality of which we, too, are a part. All these
ideas are testable, and, whichever way the data come out, simply posing
questions of this kind reshapes our understanding of what consciousness
is, how it happens, and what it is for. Every step chips away at the
beguiling but unhelpful intuition that consciousness is one thing – one
big scary mystery in search of one big scary solution.
There are plenty of practical implications too. Theoretically inspired
measures of conscious level are ushering in new consciousness ‘meters’
that are increasingly able to detect residual awareness – ‘covert
consciousness’ – in behaviourally unresponsive patients. Computational
models of predictive perception are shedding new light on the basis of
hallucinations and delusions, inaug urating a transformation in psychiatry
from treating symptoms to addressing causes. And there are all sorts of
new directions for AI, brain–machine interfaces and virtual reality,
among an abundance of established and emerging technologies. Going
after the biologic al basis of consciousness is a surprisingly useful thing
to do.
All this being said, facing up to the mystery of awareness is, and
always will be, a deeply personal journey. What good is a science of
consciousness unless it sheds new light on our individual mental lives,
and on the inner lives of those around us?
This is the real promise of the real problem. Wherever it eventually
takes us, following this road will lead us to understand so many new
things about conscious experiences of the world around us, and of
ourselves within it. We will see how our inner universe is part of, and not
apart from, the rest of nature. And, though we may not think of it as often
as we might, we will have the chance to make a new peace with what
happens – or does not happen – when the controlled hallucination of
being you finally breaks down into nothingness. When oblivion is not an
anaesthesia-induced interruption to the river of consciousness, but a
return to the eternity that each of us at one time emerged from.
At the end of this story, when life in the first person reaches its
conclusion, perhaps it’s not so bad if a little mystery remains.

Notes
a living but isolated island of cortex: Since it is still connected to a blood supply and ‘alive’,
could this disconnected hemisphere sustain its own isolated consciousness? Potential ‘islands
of awareness’ like this might also occur in other emerging neuro-technologies, such ex cranio
reanimated pig brains and the cerebral organoids I described in the previous chapter. We
discuss all these cases in Bayne et al. (2020).
It is widely agreed: Chalmers (1995b), p. 201.
aspects of perception: See also Hoffman (2019).

Acknowledgements
The ideas in this book have been shaped thanks to countless
conversations with friends, colleagues, students, teachers, and mentors
over more than two decades. I thank them all.
Thank you to all the past and present members of my research group
at Sussex. It’s been, and continues to be, a privilege to work with you. I
am particularly grateful to those from the group whose research I have
drawn on in this book. Thank you, Adam Barrett, Lionel Barnett, Peter
Lush, Alberto Mariola, Yair Pinto, Warrick Roseboom, Michael
Schartner, David Schwartzman, Maxine Sherman, Keisuke Suzuki, and
Alexander Tschantz.
Thank you also, Manuel Baltieri, Reny Baykova, Luc Berthouze,
Daniel Bor, Chris Buckley, Acer Chang, Paul Chorley, Ron Chrisley,
Andy Clark, Marianne Cole, Clémence Compain, Guillaume Corlouer,
Hugo Critchley, Zoltán Dienes, Tom Froese, Paul Graham, Inman
Harvey, Owen Holland, Ryota Kanai, Tomasz Korbak, Isabel Maranhão,
Federico Micheli, Beren Millidge, Thomas Nowotny, Andy Philippides,
Charlotte Rae, Colin Reveley, Ryan Scott, Lina Skora, Nadine Spychala,
Marta Suarez-Pinilla, Chris Thornton, Hao-Ting Wang, and Jamie Ward –
all colleagues and friends, Sussex past and present, whose work and ideas
have contributed much to my own, and many of whom have been kind
enough to read and comment on parts of this book.
I’m very grateful to have been mentored by outstanding scientists at
every stage of my career. Nicholas Mackintosh, who died in 2015, saw
me through my undergraduate degree at Cambridge and gave me the
confidence to set out in academia. Phil Husbands supervised my DPhil.
(what they used to call a PhD at Sussex), allowing me the freedom to
explore while keeping a careful eye on where I was going. Gerald
Edelman, who died in 2014, mentored me for more than six years as a
postdoctoral researcher. Under his guidance my interest in consciousness
finally became my work. I would also like to thank Margaret Boden,

Andy Clark, Daniel Dennett, and Thomas Metzinger, who have all been
extraordinary influences and inspirations over many years.
Several people took on the task of reading and commenting in detail
on early full drafts of this book. Heartfelt thanks to Tim Bayne, Andy
Clark (again), Claudia Fischer, Jakob Hohwy, and Murray Shanahan.
Their ideas and suggestions have benefited me enormously. I am also
extremely grateful to Karl Friston, Marcello Massimini, Thomas
Metzinger (again), Aniruddh (Ani) Patel, and Adrian Owen who gave
detailed advice on selected parts. Many thanks to Steve West (Lazy
Chief) for his stylish illustrations. Thank you to Baba Brinkman, whose
gift with words is a continuing inspiration. Working with him on his Rap
Guide to Consciousness has been a real highlight. Thank you to Michael
Carter for bringing me into his operating theatre to witness a
hemispherotomy. Thank you to David Edelman and Graziano Fiorito for
bringing me into the world of octopuses, Ian Cheney and Laurie Santos
for bringing me into the world of monkeys, and Luise Schreiter for
bringing me into another world altogether.
Of the many others whose advice, ideas, and support have over many
years helped me I can only mention a few. Thank you, Anil
Ananthaswamy, Chris Anderson, Bernard Baars, Lisa Feldman Barrett,
Isabel Behncke, Tristan Bekinschtein, Yoshua Bengio, Heather Berlin,
Matt Bergman, David Biello, Robin Carhart-Harris, Olivia Carter, David
Chalmers, Craig Chapman, Axel Cleeremans, Athena Demertzi, Steve
Fleming, Zaferios Fountas, Friday Football, Chris Frith, Uta Frith, Alex
Garland, Mariana Garza, Mel Goodale, Annaka Harris, Sam Harris, Nick
Humphrey, Rob Illife, Robin Ince, John Iversen, Eugene Izhikevich,
Alexis Johansen, Robert Kentridge, Christof Koch, Sid Kouider, Jeff
Krichmar, Victor Lamme, Hakwan Lau, Steven Laureys, Rafael Malach,
Daanish Masood, Simon McGregor, Pedro Mediano, Lucia Melloni, Liad
Mudrick, Phil Newman, Angus Nisbet, the Parasites, Megan Peters,
Giovanni Pezzulo, Tony Prescott, Blake Richards, Fernando Rosas,
Adam Rutherford, Tim Satterthwaite, Tom Smith, Narayanan Srinivasan,
Catherine Tallon-Baudry, Giulio Tononi, Nao Tsuchiya, Nick TurkBrowne, Lucina Uddin, Simon van Gaal, Bruno van Swinderen, Anniek
Verholt, Paul Verschure, Lucy Walker, Nigel Warburton, Lisa Westbury,
and Martijn Wokke.

These people have set me straight in all sorts of ways over the years.
This is not to say that they agree with what I say. Any remaining errors
and idiocies in the book are of course entirely my own.
I could not have written this book without support from the Wellcome
Trust (via an Engagement Fellowship), the Dr Mortimer and Theresa
Sackler Foundation, and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
(for whom I co-direct their program on Brain, Mind, and Consciousness).
I am grateful for their support both for my time and for the research my
group carries out. And thank you to Sussex University for providing me
with an academic home for many years now.
My final thanks are reserved for my agent and my editors. Will
Francis, of Janklow & Nesbit, encouraged me to write this book in the
first place, helped me shape the proposal, find excellent editors, and
generally shepherded the whole project from start to finish. Equal thanks
go to those excellent editors, Rowan Cope and Laura Hassan at Faber &
Faber, Stephen Morrow at Dutton/Penguin, and copy-editor Eleanor
Rees.

References
Albright, T. D. (2012). ‘On the perception of probable things: neural substrates of associative
memory, imagery, and perception’. Neuron, 74(2), 227–45.
Allen, M., Frank, D., Schwarzkopf, D. S., et al. (2016). ‘Unexpected arousal modulates the
influence of sensory noise on confidence’. Elife, 5, e18103.
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1959). An Introduction to Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. London: St. Augustine’s
Press.
Aru, J., Bachmann, T., Singer, W., et al. (2012). ‘Distilling the neural correlates of consciousness’.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(2), 737–46.
Ashby, W. R. (1952). Design for a Brain. London: Chapman and Hall.
Ashby, W. R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: Chapman and Hall.
Aspell, J. E., Heydrich, L., Marillier, G., et al. (2013). ‘Turning the body and self inside out:
Visualized heartbeats alter bodily self-consciousness and tactile perception’. Psychological
Science, 24(12), 2445–53.
Baars, B. J. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.
Barber, T. X. (1961). ‘Physiological effects of “hypnosis”’. Psychological Bulletin, 58, 390–419.
Barnes, J. (2008). Nothing to Be Frightened of. New York, NY: Knopf.
Barnett, L., Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Carhart-Harris, R. L., et al. (2020). ‘Decreased directed
functional connectivity in the psychedelic state’. Neuroimage, 209, 116462.
Barrett, A. B., & Seth, A. K. (2011). ‘Practical measures of integrated information for time-series
data’. PLoS Computational Biology, 7(1), e1001052.
Barrett, L. F. (2017). How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Barrett, L. F., & Satpute, A. B. (2019). ‘Historical pitfalls and new directions in the neuroscience
of emotion’. Neuroscience Letters, 693, 9–18.
Barrett, L. F., & Simmons, W. K. (2015). ‘Interoceptive predictions in the brain’. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 16(7), 419–29.
Bauby, J.-M. (1997). The Diving Bell and the Butterfly. Paris: Robert Laffont.
Bayne, T. (2008). ‘The phenomenology of agency’. Philosophy Compass, 3(1), 182–202.
Bayne, T. (2010). The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bayne, T. (2018). ‘On the axiomatic foundations of the integrated information theory of
consciousness’. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 1, niy007.
Bayne, T., Hohwy, J., & Owen, A. M. (2016). ‘Are there levels of consciousness?’ Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 20(6), 405-413.
Bayne, T., Seth, A. K., & Massimini, M. (2020). ‘Are there islands of awareness?’ Trends in
Neurosciences, 43(1), 6–16.
Bechtel, W., & Williamson, R. C. (1998). ‘Vitalism’. In E. Craig (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. London: Routledge.
Becker-Asano, C., Ogawa, K., Nishio, S., et al. (2010). ‘Exploring the uncanny valley with
Geminoid HI-1 in a real-world application’. In IADIS International Conferences Interfaces
and Human Computer Interaction, 121–8.
Berger, J. (1972). Ways of Seeing. London: Penguin.

Birch, J. (2017). ‘Animal sentience and the precautionary principle’. Animal Sentience, 16(1).
Birch, J., Schnell, A. K., & Clayton, N. S. (2020). ‘Dimensions of animal consciousness’. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 24(10), 789–801.
Blake, R., Brascamp, J., & Heeger, D. J. (2014). ‘Can binocular rivalry reveal neural correlates of
consciousness?’ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
369(1641), 20130211.
Blanke, O., Landis, T., Spinelli, L., et al. (2004). ‘Out-of-body experience and autoscopy of
neurological origin’. Brain, 127 (Pt 2), 243–58.
Blanke, O., Slater, M., & Serino, A. (2015). ‘Behavioral, neural, and computational principles of
bodily self-consciousness’. Neuron, 88(1), 145–66.
Block, N. (2005). ‘Two neural correlates of consciousness’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(2),
46–52.
Boly, M., Seth, A. K., Wilke, M., et al. (2013). ‘Consciousness in humans and non-human
animals: recent advances and future directions’. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 625.
Borrelli, L., Gherardi, F., & Fiorito, G. (2006). A Catalogue of Body Patterning in Cephalopoda.
Florence: Firenze University Press.
Bostrom, N. (2003). ‘Are you living in a computer simulation?’ Philosophical Quarterly, 53(11),
243–55.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (1998). ‘Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see’. Nature, 391(6669),
756.
Brainard, D. H., & Hurlbert, A. C. (2015). ‘Colour vision: understanding #TheDress’. Current
Biology, 25(13), R551–4.
Brass, M., & Haggard, P. (2007). ‘To do or not to do: the neural signature of self-control’. Journal
of Neuroscience, 27(34), 9141–5.
Brass, M., & Haggard, P. (2008). ‘The what, when, whether model of intentional action’.
Neuroscientist, 14(4), 319–25.
Braun, N., Debener, S., Spychala, N., et al. (2018). ‘The senses of agency and ownership: a
review’. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 535.
Brembs, B. (2011). ‘Towards a scientific concept of free will as a biological trait: spontaneous
actions and decision-making in invertebrates’. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 278(1707), 930–39.
Brembs, B. (2020). ‘The brain as a dynamically active organ’. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.12.011.
Brener, J., & Ring, C. (2016). ‘Towards a psychophysics of interoceptive processes: the
measurement of heartbeat detection’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 371(1708), 20160015.
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., et al. (2013). ‘Active inference, sensory attenuation and
illusions’. Cognitive Processing, 14(4), 411–27.
Brown, R., Lau, H., & LeDoux, J. E. (2019). ‘Understanding the higher-order approach to
consciousness’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23(9), 754–68.
Brugger, P., & Lenggenhager, B. (2014). ‘The bodily self and its disorders: neurological,
psychological and social aspects’. Current Opinion in Neurology, 27(6), 644–52.
Bruineberg, J., Dolega, K., Dewhurst, J., et al. (2020). ‘The Emperor’s new Markov blankets’.
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/18467.
Bruner, J. S., & Goodman, C. C. (1947). ‘Value and need as organizing factors in perception’.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 42(1), 33–44.
Buckley, C., Kim, C.-S., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). ‘The free energy principle for
action and perception: A mathematical review’. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 81, 55–

79.
Burns, J. M., & Swerdlow, R. H. (2003). ‘Right orbitofrontal tumor with pedophilia symptom and
constructional apraxia sign’. Archives of Neurology, 60(3), 437–40.
Buzsáki, G. (2019). The Brain from Inside Out. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Byrne, A., & Hilbert, D. (2011). ‘Are colors secondary qualities?’ In L. Nolan (ed.), Primary and
Secondary Qualities: The Historical and Ongoing Debate, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
339–61.
Caramazza, A., Anzellotti, S., Strnad, L., et al. (2014). ‘Embodied cognition and mirror neurons:
a critical assessment’. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 37, 1–15.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T., et al. (2012). ‘Neural correlates of the
psychedelic state as determined by fMRI studies with psilocybin’. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 109(6), 2138–43.
Carls-Diamante, S. (2017). ‘The octopus and the unity of consciousness’. Biology and
Philosophy, 32, 1269–87.
Casali, A. G., Gosseries, O., Rosanova, M., et al. (2013). ‘A theoretically based index of
consciousness independent of sensory processing and behavior’. Science Translational
Medicine, 5(198), 198ra105.
Casarotto, S., Comanducci, A., Rosanova, M., et al. (2016). ‘Stratification of unresponsive
patients by an independently validated index of brain complexity’. Annals of Neurology, 80(5),
718–29.
Caspar, E. A., Christensen, J. F., Cleeremans, A., et al. (2016). ‘Coercion changes the sense of
agency in the human brain’. Current Biology, 26(5), 585–92.
Chalmers, D. J. (1995a). ‘Facing up to the problem of consciousness’. Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 2(3), 200–19.
Chalmers, D. J. (1995b). ‘The puzzle of conscious experience’. Scientific American, 273(6), 80–6.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2018). ‘The meta-problem of consciousness’. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
25(9–10), 6–61.
Chang, H. (2004). Inventing Temperature: Measurement and Scientific Progress. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Chang, L., Zhang, S., Poo, M. M., et al. (2017). ‘Spontaneous expression of mirror selfrecognition in monkeys after learning precise visual-proprioceptive association for mirror
images’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 114(12), 3258–63.
Churchland, P. S. (1996). ‘The hornswoggle problem’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3(5–6),
402–8.
Cisek, P. (2007). ‘Cortical mechanisms of action selection: the affordance competition
hypothesis’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
362(1485), 1585–99.
Clark, A. (2013). ‘Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive
science’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–204.
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing Uncertainty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clayton, N. S., Dally, J. M., & Emery, N. J. (2007). ‘Social cognition by food-caching corvids.
The western scrub-jay as a natural psychologist’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1480), 507–22.
Cobb, M. (2020). The Idea of the Brain: A History. London: Profile Books.
Collier, R. (2012). ‘Hospital-induced delirium hits hard’. Canadian Medical Association Journal,
184(1), 23–4.
Conant, R., & Ashby, W. R. (1970). ‘Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that
system’. International Journal of Systems Science, 1(2), 89–97.

Cotard, J. (1880). ‘Du délire hypocondriaque dans une forme grave de la mélancolie anxieuse.
Mémoire lu à la Société médico-psychophysiologique dans la séance du 28 Juin 1880’.
Annales Medico-Psychologiques, 168–74.
Cowey, A., & Stoerig, P. (1995). ‘Blindsight in monkeys’. Nature, 373(6511), 247–9.
Craig, A. D. (2002). ‘How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of
the body’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 655–66.
Craig, A. D. (2009). ‘How do you feel––now? The anterior insula and human awareness’. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 10(1), 59–70.
Craver, C., & Tabery, J. (2017). ‘Mechanisms in science’. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. plato.stanford.edu/entries/science-mechanisms.
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (1990). ‘Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness’. Seminars in
the Neurosciences, 2, 263–75.
Critchley, H. D., & Harrison, N. A. (2013). ‘Visceral influences on brain and behavior’. Neuron,
77(4), 624–38.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York, NY:
Harper & Row.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error. London: Macmillan.
Damasio, A. (2000). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of
Consciousness. Harvest Books.
Damasio, A. (2010). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. London: William
Heinemann.
Darwin, C. (1872). The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals. London: Fontana Press.
Davis, D. H., Muniz-Terrera, G., Keage, H. A., et al. (2017). ‘Association of delirium with
cognitive decline in late life: a neuropathologic study of three population-based cohort
studies’. JAMA Psychiatry, 74(3), 244–51.
de Graaf, T. A., Hsieh, P. J., & Sack, A. T. (2012). ‘The “correlates” in neural correlates of
consciousness’. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(1), 191–7.
de Haan, E. H., Pinto, Y., Corballis, P. M., et al. (2020). ‘Split-brain: What we know about cutting
the corpus callosum now and why this is important for understanding consciousness’.
Neuropsychological Review, 30, 224–33.
de Lange, F. P., Heilbron, M., & Kok, P. (2018). ‘How do expectations shape perception?’ Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 22(9), 764–79.
de Waal, F. B. M. (2019). ‘Fish, mirrors, and a gradualist perspective on self-awareness’. PLoS
Biology, 17(2), e3000112.
Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J. P. (2011). ‘Experimental and theoretical approaches to conscious
processing’. Neuron, 70(2), 200–227.
Dehaene, S., Lau, H., & Kouider, S. (2017). ‘What is consciousness, and could machines have it?’
Science, 358(6362), 486–92.
Deisseroth, K. (2015). ‘Optogenetics: ten years of microbial opsins in neuroscience’. Nature
Neuroscience, 18(9), 1213–25.
Della Sala, S., Marchetti, C., & Spinnler, H. (1991). ‘Right-sided anarchic (alien) hand: a
longitudinal study’. Neuropsychologia, 29(11), 1113–27.
Demertzi, A., Tagliazucchi, E., Dehaene, S., et al. (2019). ‘Human consciousness is supported by
dynamic complex patterns of brain signal coordination’. Science Advances, 5(2), eaat7603.
Dennett, D. C. (1984). Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
Dennett, D. C. (1998). ‘The myth of double transduction’. In S. Hameroff, A. W. Kasniak, & A.
C. Scott (eds), Toward a Science of Consciousness II: The Second Tucson Discussions and
Debates, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 97–101.

Dennett, D. C. (2003). Freedom Evolves. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
Dennett, D. C. (2015). ‘Why and how does consciousness seem the way it seems?’ In T.
Metzinger & J. M. Windt (eds), Open MIND. Frankfurt-am-Main: MIND Group.
Dennett, D. C. & Caruso, G. (2021). Just Deserts: Debating Free Will. Cambridge: Polity.
Deutsch, D. (2012). The Beginning of Infinity: Explanations that Transform the World. New York
NY: Penguin Books.
DiNuzzo, M., & Nedergaard, M. (2017). ‘Brain energetics during the sleep-wake cycle’. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 47, 65–72.
Donne, J. (1839). ‘Devotions upon emergent occasions: Meditation XVII’ [1624]. In H. Alford
(ed.), The Works of John Donne, London: Henry Parker, vol. 3, 574–5.
Duffy, S. W., Vulkan, D., Cuckle, H., et al. (2020). ‘Effect of mammographic screening from age
forty years on breast cancer mortality (UK Age trial): final results of a randomised, controlled
trial’. Lancet Oncology, 21(9), 1165–72.
Dupuy, J.-P. (2009). On the Origins of Cognitive Science: The Mechanization of the Mind. 2nd
edn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dutton, D. G., & Aron, A. P. (1974). ‘Some evidence for heightened sexual attraction under
conditions of high anxiety’. Journal of Personal and Social Psychology, 30(4), 510–17.
Edelman, D. B., Baars, B. J., & Seth, A. K. (2005). ‘Identifying hallmarks of consciousness in
non-mammalian species’. Consciousness and Cognition, 14(1), 169–87.
Edelman, D. B., & Seth, A. K. (2009). ‘Animal consciousness: a synthetic approach’. Trends in
Neuroscience, 32(9), 476–84.
Edelman, G. M. (1989). The Remembered Present. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Edelman, G. M., & Gally, J. (2001). ‘Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems’.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 98(24), 13763–8.
Ehrsson, H. H. (2007). ‘The experimental induction of out-of-body experiences’. Science,
317(5841), 1048.
Ekman, P. (1992). ‘An argument for basic emotions’. Cognition and Emotion, 6(3-4), 169–200.
Entler, B. V., Cannon, J. T., & Seid, M. A. (2016). ‘Morphine addiction in ants: a new model for
self-administration and neurochemical analysis’. Journal of Experimental Biology, 219 (Pt 18),
2865–9.
Evans, E. P. (1906). The Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals. London:
William Heinemann.
Feinberg, T. E., & Mallatt, J. M. (2017). The Ancient Origins of Consciousness: How the Brain
Created Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). ‘Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy’. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 4, 215.
Felleman, D. J., & Van Essen, D. C. (1991). ‘Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate
cerebral cortex’. Cerebral Cortex, 1(1), 1–47.
Ferrarelli, F., Massimini, M., Sarasso, S., et al. (2010). ‘Breakdown in cortical effective
connectivity during midazolam-induced loss of consciousness’. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 107(6), 2681–6.
Fiorito, G., & Scotto, P. (1992). ‘Observational learning in Octopus vulgaris’. Science, 256(5056),
545–7.
Firestone, C. (2013). ‘On the origin and status of the “El Greco fallacy”’. Perception, 42(6), 672–
4.
Fletcher, P. C., & Frith, C. D. (2009). ‘Perceiving is believing: a Bayesian approach to explaining
the positive symptoms of schizophrenia’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(1), 48–58.
Fleming, S. M. (2020). ‘Awareness as inference in a higher-order state space’. Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 2020(1), niz020.

Flounders, M. W., Gonzalez-Garcia, C., Hardstone, R., et al. (2019). ‘Neural dynamics of visual
ambiguity resolution by perceptual prior.’ Elife, 8, e41861.
Formisano, R., D’Ippolito, M., Risetti, M., et al. (2011). ‘Vegetative state, minimally conscious
state, akinetic mutism and Parkinsonism as a continuum of recovery from disorders of
consciousness: an exploratory and preliminary study’. Functional Neurology, 26(1), 15–24.
Frankish, K. (2017). Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness. Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Frässle, S., Sommer, J., Jansen, A., et al. (2014). ‘Binocular rivalry: frontal activity relates to
introspection and action but not to perception’. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(5), 1738–47.
Fredens, J., Wang, K., de la Torre, D., et al. (2019). ‘Total synthesis of Escherichia coli with a
recoded genome’. Nature, 569(7757), 514–18.
Fried, I., Katz, A., McCarthy, G., et al. (1991). ‘Functional organization of human supplementary
motor cortex studied by electrical stimulation’. Journal of Neuroscience, 11(11), 3656–66.
Friston, K. J. (2009). ‘The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain?’ Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 13(7), 293–301.
Friston, K. J. (2010). ‘The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?’ Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–38.
Friston, K. J. (2018). ‘Am I self-conscious? (Or does self-organization entail selfconsciousness?)’. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 579.
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., et al. (2010). ‘Action and behavior: a free-energy
formulation’. Biological Cybernetics, 102(3), 227–60.
Friston, K. J., Thornton, C., & Clark, A. (2012). ‘Free-energy minimization and the dark-room
problem’. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 130.
Frith, C. D. (2007). Making Up the Mind: How the Brain Creates Our Mental World. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Gallagher, S. (2008). ‘Direct perception in the intersubjective context’. Consciousness and
Cognition, 17(2), 535–43.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., et al. (1996). ‘Action recognition in the premotor cortex’.
Brain, 119 (Pt 2), 593–609.
Gallup, G. G. (1970). ‘Chimpanzees: self-recognition’. Science, 167, 86–7.
Gallup, G. G., & Anderson, J. R. (2018). ‘The “olfactory mirror” and other recent attempts to
demonstrate self-recognition in non-primate species’. Behavioural Processes, 148, 16–19.
Gallup, G. G., & Anderson, J. R. (2020). ‘Self-recognition in animals: Where do we stand fifty
years later? Lessons from cleaner wrasse and other species’. Psychology of Consciousness:
Theory, Research, and Practice, 7(1), 46–58.
Gasquet, J. (1991). Cézanne: A Memoir with Conversations. London: Thames & Hudson Ltd.
Gehrlach, D. A., Dolensek, N., Klein, A. S., et al. (2019). ‘Aversive state processing in the
posterior insular cortex’. Nature Neuroscience, 22(9), 1424–37.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Gidon, A., Zolnik, T. A., Fidzinski, P., et al. (2020). ‘Dendritic action potentials and computation
in human layer 2/3 cortical neurons’. Science, 367(6473), 83–7.
Gifford, C., & Seth, A. K. (2013). Eye Benders: The Science of Seeing and Believing. London:
Thames & Hudson.
Ginsburg, S., & Jablonka, E. (2019). The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul: Learning and the
Origins of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. G. (1996). ‘Spencer and Dewey on life and mind’. In M. Boden (ed.), The
Philosophy of Artificial Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 314–31.
Godfrey-Smith, P. G. (2017). Other Minds: The Octopus, the Sea, and the Deep Origins of
Consciousness. New York: Farrar, Strauss, and Giroux.

Goff, P. (2019). Galileo’s Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness. London:
Rider.
Gombrich, E. H. (1961). Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation.
Ewing, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goodstein, D. L. (1985). States of Matter. Chelmsford, MA: Courier Corporation.
Gregory, R. L. (1980). ‘Perceptions as hypotheses’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 290(1038), 181–97.
Grill-Spector, K., & Malach, R. (2004). ‘The human visual cortex’. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 27, 649–77.
Haggard, P. (2008). ‘Human volition: towards a neuroscience of will’. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 9(12), 934–46.
Haggard, P. (2019). ‘The neurocognitive bases of human volition’. Annual Review of Psychology,
70, 9–28.
Hanlon, J., & Messenger, J. B. (1996). Cephalopod Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Harding, D. E. (1961). On Having No Head. London: The Shollond Trust.
Harris, S. (2012). Free Will. New York: Deckle Edge.
Harrison, N. A., Gray, M. A., Gianaros, P. J., et al. (2010). ‘The embodiment of emotional
feelings in the brain’. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(38), 12878–84.
Harvey, I. (2008). ‘Misrepresentations’. In S. Bullock, J. Noble, R. Watson, et al. (Eds.), Artificial
Life Xi: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference On the Simulation and Synthesis of
Living Systems (pp. 227–33). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hatfield, G. (2002). Descartes and the Meditations. Abingdon: Routledge.
Haun, A. M. (2021). ‘What is visible across the visual field?’ Neuroscience of Consciousness.
Haun, A. M., & Tononi, G. (2019). ‘Why does space feel the way it does? Towards a principled
account of spatial experience’. Entropy, 21(12), 1160.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., et al. (2016). ‘Deep residual learning for image recognition’. In 2016
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Heilbron, M., Richter, D., Ekman, M., et al. (2020). ‘Word contexts enhance the neural
representation of individual letters in early visual cortex’. Nature Communications, 11(1), 321.
Herculano-Houzel, S. (2009). ‘The human brain in numbers: a linearly scaled-up primate brain’.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 3, 31.
Herculano-Houzel, S. (2016). The Human Advantage: A New Understanding of How Our Brain
Became Remarkable. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hochner, B. (2012). ‘An embodied view of octopus neurobiology’. Current Biology, 22(20),
R887–92.
Hoel, E. P., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2013). ‘Quantifying causal emergence shows that
macro can beat micro’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 110(49),
19790–5.
Hoffman, D. (2019). The Case against Reality: Why Evolution Hid the Truth from Our Eyes.
London: W. W. Norton & Company.
Hoffman, D., Singh, M., & Prakash, C. (2015). ‘The interface theory of perception’. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 22, 1480–1506.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2014). ‘The self-evidencing brain’. Nous, 50(2), 259–85.
Hohwy, J. (2020a). ‘New directions in predictive processing’. Mind and Language. 35(2), 209–
23.
Hohwy, J. (2020b). ‘Self-supervision, normativity and the free energy principle’. Synthese.
doi:10.1007/s11229-020-02622-2.

Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. K. (2020). ‘Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the
neural correlates of consciousness’. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(2), 3.
Hurley, S., & Noë, A. (2003). ‘Neural plasticity and consciousness’. Biology and Philosophy, 18,
131–68.
Husserl, E. (1960 [1931]). Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. The
Hague: Nijhoff.
Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (2004). ‘Vitalistic causality in young children’s naive biology’. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 8(8), 356–62.
James, W. (1884). ‘What is an emotion?’. Mind, 9(34), 188–205.
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. New York: Henry Holt.
Jao Keehn, R. J., Iversen, J. R., Schulz, I., et al. (2019). ‘Spontaneity and diversity of movement
to music are not uniquely human’. Current Biology, 29(13), R621–R622.
Jensen, F. V. (2000). Introduction to Bayesian Networks. New York: Springer.
Jensen, M. P., Jamieson, G. A., Lutz, A., et al. (2017). ‘New directions in hypnosis research:
strategies for advancing the cognitive and clinical neuroscience of hypnosis’. Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 3(1), nix004.
Kail, P. J. E. (2007). Projection and Realism in Hume’s Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kandel, E. R. (2012). The Age of Insight: The Quest to Understand the Unconscious in Art, Mind,
and Brain, from Vienna 1900 to the Present. New York: Random House.
Kelz, M. B., & Mashour, G. A. (2019). ‘The biology of general anesthesia from paramecium to
primate’. Current Biology, 29(22), R1199–R1210.
Kessler, M. J., & Rawlins, R. G. (2016). ‘A seventy-five-year pictorial history of the Cayo
Santiago rhesus monkey colony’. American Journal of Primatology, 78(1), 6–43.
Khuong, T. M., Wang, Q. P., Manion, J., et al. (2019). ‘Nerve injury drives a heightened state of
vigilance and neuropathic sensitization in Drosophila’. Science Advances, 5(7), eaaw4099.
Kirchhoff, M. (2018). ‘Autopoeisis, free-energy, and the life-mind continuity thesis’. Synthese,
195(6), 2519–40.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., et al. (2018). ‘The Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active
inference and the free energy principle’. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 15(138),
20170792.
Koch, C. (2019). The Feeling of Life Itself: Why Consciousness Is Widespread But Can’t Be
Computed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kohda, M., Hotta, T., Takeyama, T., et al. (2019). ‘If a fish can pass the mark test, what are the
implications for consciousness and self-awareness testing in animals?’ PLoS Biology, 17(2),
e3000021.
Kornhuber, H. H., & Deecke, L. (1965). [‘Changes in the brain potential in voluntary movements
and passive movements in man: readiness potential and reafferent potentials’]. Pflügers Archiv
für die gesamte Physiologie des Menschen und der Tiere, 284, 1–17.
Konkoly, K. R., Appel, K., Chabani, E., et al. (2021). ‘Real-time dialogue between experimenters
and dreamers during REM sleep’. Current Biology, 31(7), 1417–27.
Kuhn, G., Amlani, A. A., & Rensink, R. A. (2008). ‘Towards a science of magic’. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 12(9), 349–54.
Lakatos, I. (1978). The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes: Philosophical Papers.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
La Mettrie, J. O. de (1748). L’Homme machine. Leiden: Luzac.
Lau, H., & Rosenthal, D. (2011). ‘Empirical support for higher-order theories of conscious
awareness’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(8), 365–73.
LeDoux, J. (2012). ‘Rethinking the emotional brain’. Neuron, 73(4), 653–76.

LeDoux, J. (2019). The Deep History of Ourselves: The Four-billion-year Story of How We Got
Conscious Brains. New York, NY: Viking.
LeDoux, J., Michel, M., & Lau, H. (2020). ‘A little history goes a long way toward understanding
why we study consciousness the way we do today.’ Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 117(13), 6976–84.
Lemon, R. N., & Edgley, S. A. (2010). ‘Life without a cerebellum’. Brain, 133 (Pt 3), 652–4.
Lenggenhager, B., Tadi, T., Metzinger, T., et al. (2007). ‘Video ergo sum: manipulating bodily
self-consciousness’. Science, 317(5841), 1096–9.
Lettvin, J. Y. (1976). ‘On seeing sidelong’. The Sciences, 16, 10–20.
Libet, B. (1985). ‘Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in voluntary
action’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8, 529–66.
Libet, B., Wright, E. W., Jr., & Gleason, C. A. (1983). ‘Preparation- or intention-to-act, in relation
to pre-event potentials recorded at the vertex’. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 56(4), 367–72.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the Best Explanation. Abingdon: Routledge.
Liscovitch-Brauer, N., Alon, S., Porath, H. T., et al. (2017). ‘Trade-off between transcriptome
plasticity and genome evolution in cephalopods’. Cell, 169(2), 191–202 e111.
Livneh, Y., Sugden, A. U., Madara, J. C., et al. (2020). ‘Estimation of current and future
physiological states in insular cortex’. Neuron, 105(6), 1094–1111.e10.
Luppi, A. I., Craig, M. M., Pappas, I., et al. (2019). ‘Consciousness-specific dynamic interactions
of brain integration and functional diversity’. Nature Communications, 10(1), 4616.
Lush, P. (2020). ‘Demand characteristics confound the rubber hand illusion’. Collabra
Psychology, 6, 22.
Lush, P., Botan, V., Scott, R. B., et al. (2020). ‘Trait phenomenological control predicts
experience of mirror synaesthesia and the rubber hand illusion’. Nature Communications,
11(1), 4853.
Lyamin, O. I., Kosenko, P. O., Korneva, S. M., et al. (2018). ‘Fur seals suppress REM sleep for
very long periods without subsequent rebound’. Current Biology, 28(12), 2000–2005 e2002.
Makari, G. (2016). Soul Machine: The Invention of the Modern Mind. London: W. W. Norton.
Marken, R. S., & Mansell, W. (2013). ‘Perceptual control as a unifying concept in psychology’.
Review of General Psychology, 17(2), 190–95.
Markov, N. T., Vezoli, J., Chameau, P., et al. (2014). ‘Anatomy of hierarchy: feedforward and
feedback pathways in macaque visual cortex’. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 522(1),
225–59.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and
Processing of Visual Information. New York: Freeman.
Mashour, G. A., Roelfsema, P., Changeux, J. P., et al. (2020). ‘Conscious processing and the
global neuronal workspace hypothesis’. Neuron, 105(5), 776–98.
Massimini, M., Ferrarelli, F., Huber, R., et al. (2005). ‘Breakdown of cortical effective
connectivity during sleep’. Science, 309(5744), 2228–32.
Mather, J. (2019). ‘What is in an octopus’s mind?’. Animal Sentience, 26(1), 1–29.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
McEwan, I. (2000). Atonement. New York: Anchor Books.
McGinn, C. (1989). ‘Can we solve the mind-body problem?’ Mind, 98(391), 349–66.
McGrayne, S. B. (2012). The Theory That Would Not Die: How Bayes’ Rule Cracked the Enigma
Code, Hunted Down Russian Submarines, and Emerged Triumphant from Two Centuries of
Controversy. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
McLeod, P., Reed, N., & Dienes, Z. (2003). ‘Psychophysics: how fielders arrive in time to catch
the ball’. Nature, 426(6964), 244–5.

Mediano, P. A. M., Seth, A. K., & Barrett, A. B. (2019). ‘Measuring integrated information:
comparison of candidate measures in theory and simulation’. Entropy, 21(1), 17.
Mele, A. (2009). Effective Intentions: The Power of Conscious Will. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Melloni, L., Schwiedrzik, C. M., Muller, N., et al. (2011). ‘Expectations change the signatures and
timing of electrophysiological correlates of perceptual awareness’. Journal of Neuroscience,
31(4), 1386–96.
Merker, B. (2007). ‘Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: a challenge for neuroscience and
medicine’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(1), 63–81; discussion 81–134.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). ‘Eye and mind’. In J. E. Edie (ed.), The Primacy of Perception,
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 159–90.
Messenger, J. B. (2001). ‘Cephalopod chromatophores: neurobiology and natural history’.
Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 76(4), 473–528.
Metzinger, T. (2003a). Being No One. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (2003b). ‘Phenomenal transparency and cognitive self-reference’. Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Sciences, 2, 353–93.
Metzinger, T. (2021). ‘Artificial suffering: An argument for a global moratorium on synthetic
phenomenology’. Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Consciousness, 8(1), 1–24.
Monroe, R. (1971). Journeys out of the Body. London: Anchor Press.
Monti, M. M., Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Coleman, M. R., et al. (2010). ‘Willful modulation of brain
activity in disorders of consciousness’. New England Journal of Medicine, 362(7), 579–89.
Mori, M., MacDorman, K. F., & Kageki, N. (2012). ‘The Uncanny Valley’. IEEE Robotics &
Automation Magazine, 19(2), 98–100.
Myles, P. S., Leslie, K., McNeil, J., et al. (2004). ‘Bispectral index monitoring to prevent
awareness during anaesthesia: the B-Aware randomised controlled trial’. Lancet, 363(9423),
1757–63.
Naci, L., Sinai, L., & Owen, A. M. (2017). ‘Detecting and interpreting conscious experiences in
behaviorally non-responsive patients’. Neuroimage, 145 (Pt B), 304–13.
Nagel, T. (1974). ‘What is it like to be a bat?’ Philosophical Review, 83(4), 435–50.
Nasraway, S. S., Jr., Wu, E. C., Kelleher, R. M., et al. (2002). ‘How reliable is the Bispectral
Index in critically ill patients? A prospective, comparative, single-blinded observer study’.
Critical Care Medicine, 30(7), 1483–7.
Nesher, N., Levy, G., Grasso, F. W., et al. (2014). ‘Self-recognition mechanism between skin and
suckers prevents octopus arms from interfering with each other’. Current Biology, 24(11),
1271–5.
Nin, A. (1961). Seduction of the Minotaur. Denver, CO: Swallow Press.
O’Regan, J. K. (2011). Why Red Doesn’t Sound Like a Bell: Understanding the Feel of
Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Regan, J. K., & Noë, A. (2001). ‘A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness’.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(5), 939–73; discussion 973–1031.
Orne, M. T. (1962). ‘On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: with particular
reference to demand characteristics and their implications’. American Psychologist, 17, 776–
83.
Owen, A. M. (2017). Into the Grey Zone: A Neuroscientist Explores the Border between Life and
Death. London: Faber & Faber.
Owen, A. M., Coleman, M. R., Boly, M., et al. (2006). ‘Detecting awareness in the vegetative
state’. Science, 313(5792), 1402.
Palmer, C. E., Davare, M., & Kilner, J. M. (2016). ‘Physiological and perceptual sensory
attenuation have different underlying neurophysiological correlates’. Journal of Neuroscience,

36(42), 10803–12.
Palmer, C. J., Seth, A. K., & Hohwy, J. (2015). ‘The felt presence of other minds: Predictive
processing, counterfactual predictions, and mentalising in autism’. Consciousness and
Cognition, 36, 376–89.
Panksepp, J. (2004). Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal Emotions.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2005). ‘Affective consciousness: Core emotional feelings in animals and humans’.
Consciousness and Cognition, 14(1), 30–80.
Park, H. D., & Blanke, O. (2019). ‘Coupling inner and outer body for self-consciousness’. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 23(5), 377–88.
Park, H. D., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2014). ‘The neural subjective frame: from bodily signals to
perceptual consciousness’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 369(1641), 20130208.
Parvizi, J., & Damasio, A. (2001). ‘Consciousness and the brainstem’. Cognition, 79(1–2), 135–
60.
Penrose, R. (1989). The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pepperberg, I. M., & Gordon, J. D. (2005). ‘Number comprehension by a grey parrot (Psittacus
erithacus), including a zero-like concept’. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 119(2), 197–
209.
Pepperberg, I. M., & Shive, H. R. (2001). ‘Simultaneous development of vocal and physical
object combinations by a grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus): bottle caps, lids, and labels’.
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 115(4), 376–84.
Petkova, V. I., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2008). ‘If I were you: perceptual illusion of body swapping’.
PLoS One, 3(12), e3832.
Petzschner, F. H., Weber, L. A., Wellstein, K. V., et al. (2019). ‘Focus of attention modulates the
heartbeat evoked potential’. Neuroimage, 186, 595–606.
Petzschner, F. H., Weber, L. A. E., Gard, T., et al. (2017). ‘Computational psychosomatics and
computational psychiatry: toward a joint framework for differential diagnosis’. Biological
Psychiatry, 82(6), 421–30.
Phillips, M. L., Medford, N., Senior, C., et al. (2001). ‘Depersonalization disorder: thinking
without feeling’. Psychiatry Research, 108(3), 145–60.
Pinto, Y., van Gaal, S., de Lange, F. P., et al. (2015). ‘Expectations accelerate entry of visual
stimuli into awareness’. Journal of Vision, 15(8), 13.
Pollan, M. (2018). How to Change Your Mind. New York, NY: Penguin.
Portin, P. (2009). ‘The elusive concept of the gene’. Hereditas, 146(3), 112–17.
Posada, S., & Colell, M. (2007). ‘Another gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla) recognizes himself in a
mirror’. American Journal of Primatology, 69(5), 576–83.
Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: The Control of Perception. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Press, C., Kok, P., & Yon, D. (2020). ‘The perceptual prediction paradox’. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 24(1), 13–24.
Pressnitzer, D., Graves, J., Chambers, C., et al. (2018). ‘Auditory perception: Laurel and Yanny
together at last’. Current Biology, 28(13), R739–R741.
Raccah, O., Block, N., & Fox, K. (2021). ‘Does the prefrontal cortex play an essential role in
consciousness? Insights from intracranial electrical stimulation of the human brain. Journal of
Neuroscience, 41(1), 2076–87.
Rao, R. P., & Ballard, D. H. (1999). ‘Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional
interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects’. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1), 79–
87.
Reep, R. L., Finlay, B. L., & Darlington, R. B. (2007). ‘The limbic system in mammalian brain
evolution’. Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 70(1), 57–70.

Richards, B. A., Lillicrap, T. P., Beaudoin, P., et al. (2019). ‘A deep learning framework for
neuroscience’. Nature Neuroscience, 22(11), 1761–70.
Riemer, M., Trojan, J., Beauchamp, M., et al. (2019). ‘The rubber hand universe: On the impact
of methodological differences in the rubber hand illusion’. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 104, 268–80.
Rosas, F., Mediano, P. A. M., Jensen, H. J., et al. (2021). ‘Reconciling emergences: An
information-theoretic approach to identify causal emergence in multivariate data’. PLoS
Computational Biology, 16(12), e1008289.
Roseboom, W., Fountas, Z., Nikiforou, K., et al. (2019). ‘Activity in perceptual classification
networks as a basis for human subjective time perception’. Nature Communications, 10(1),
267.
Rousseau, M. C., Baumstarck, K., Alessandrini, M., et al. (2015). ‘Quality of life in patients with
locked-in syndrome: Evolution over a six-year period’. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases,
10, 88.
Russell, S. (2019). Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control. New
York: Viking.
Sabra, A. I. (1989). The Optics of Ibn Al-Haytham, Books I–III. London: The Warburg Institute.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. E. (1962). ‘Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of
emotional state’. Psychological Review, 69, 379–99.
Schartner, M. M., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Barrett, A. B., et al. (2017a). ‘Increased spontaneous
MEG signal diversity for psychoactive doses of ketamine, LSD and psilocybin’. Scientific
Reports, 7, 46421.
Schartner, M. M., Pigorini, A., Gibbs, S. A., et al. (2017b). ‘Global and local complexity of
intracranial EEG decreases during NREM sleep’. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 3(1),
niw022.
Schartner, M. M., Seth, A. K., Noirhomme, Q., et al. (2015). ‘Complexity of multi-dimensional
spontaneous EEG decreases during propofol induced general anaesthesia’. PLoS One, 10(8),
e0133532.
Schick, N. (2020). Deep Fakes and the Infocalypse: What You Urgently Need to Know. Monterey,
CA: Monoray.
Schneider, S. (2019). Artificial You: AI and the Future of Your Mind. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Schurger, A., Sitt, J. D., & Dehaene, S. (2012). ‘An accumulator model for spontaneous neural
activity prior to self-initiated movement’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the USA, 109(42), E2904–13.
Searle, J. (1980). ‘Minds, brains, and programs’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3(3), 417–57.
Seth, A. K. (2009). ‘Explanatory correlates of consciousness: Theoretical and computational
challenges’. Cognitive Computation, 1(1), 50–63.
Seth, A. K. (2010). ‘Measuring autonomy and emergence via Granger causality’. Artificial Life,
16(2), 179–96.
Seth, A. K. (2013). ‘Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self’. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 17(11), 565–73.
Seth, A. K. (2014a). ‘Darwin’s neuroscientist: Gerald M. Edelman, 1929–2014’. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 896.
Seth, A. K. (2014b). ‘A predictive processing theory of sensorimotor contingencies: Explaining
the puzzle of perceptual presence and its absence in synaesthesia’. Cognitive Neuroscience,
5(2), 97–118.
Seth, A. K. (2015a). ‘The cybernetic bayesian brain: from interoceptive inference to sensorimotor
contingencies’. In J. M. Windt & T. Metzinger (eds), Open MIND, Frankfurt am Main: MIND
Group, 35(T).

Seth, A. K. (2015b). ‘Inference to the best prediction’. In T. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (eds), Open
MIND, Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, 35(R).
Seth, A. K. (2016a). ‘Aliens on earth: What octopus minds can tell us about alien consciousness’.
In J. Al-Khalili (ed.), Aliens, London: Profile Books, 47–58.
Seth, A. K. (2016b). ‘The real problem’. Aeon. aeon.co/essays/the-hard-problem-ofconsciousness-is-a-distraction-from-the-real-one.
Seth, A. K. (2017). ‘The fall and rise of consciousness science’. In A. Haag (Ed.), The Return of
Consciousness (pp. 13–41). Riga: Ax:Son Johnson Foundation.
Seth, A. K. (2018). ‘Consciousness: The last 50 years (and the next)’. Brain and Neuroscience
Advances, 2, 2398212818816019.
Seth, A. K. (2019a). ‘Being a beast machine: The origins of selfhood in control-oriented
interoceptive inference’. In M. Colombo, L. Irvine, & M. Stapleton (eds), Andy Clark and his
Critics, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 238–54.
Seth, A. K. (2019b). ‘From unconscious inference to the Beholder’s Share: Predictive perception
and human experience’. European Review, 273(3), 378–410.
Seth, A. K. (2019c). ‘Our inner universes’. Scientific American, 321(3), 40–47.
Seth, A. K., Baars, B. J., & Edelman, D. B. (2005). ‘Criteria for consciousness in humans and
other mammals’. Consciousness and Cognition, 14(1), 119–39.
Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., & Barnett, L. (2011a). ‘Causal density and integrated information as
measures of conscious level’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences, 369(1952), 3748–67.
Seth, A. K., Dienes, Z., Cleeremans, A., et al. (2008). ‘Measuring consciousness: relating
behavioural and neurophysiological approaches’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(8), 314–21.
Seth, A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). ‘Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain’.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 371(1708), 20160007.
Seth, A. K., Izhikevich, E., Reeke, G. N., et al. (2006). ‘Theories and measures of consciousness:
An extended framework’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA,
103(28), 10799–804.
Seth, A. K., Millidge, B., Buckley, C. L., et al. (2020). ‘Curious inferences: Reply to Sun and
Firestone on the dark room problem’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(9), 681–3.
Seth, A. K., Roseboom, W., Dienes, Z., & Lush, P. (2021). ‘What’s up with the rubber hand
illusion?’. https://psyarxiv.com/b4qcy/
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., & Critchley, H. D. (2011b). ‘An interoceptive predictive coding model of
conscious presence’. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 395.
Seth, A. K., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). ‘Being a beast machine: the somatic basis of selfhood’. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 22(11), 969–81.
Shanahan, M. P. (2010). Embodiment and the Inner Life: Cognition and Consciousness in the
Space of Possible Minds. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shanahan, M. P. (2015). The Technological Singularity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sherman, M. T., Fountas, Z., Seth, A. K., et al. (2020). ‘Accumulation of salient events in sensory
cortex activity predicts subjective time’.
www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.01.09.900423v4.
Shigeno, S., Andrews, P. L. R., Ponte, G., et al. (2018). ‘Cephalopod brains: an overview of
current knowledge to facilitate comparison with vertebrates’. Frontiers in Physiology, 9, 952.
Shugg, W. (1968). ‘The cartesian beast-machine in English literature (1663–1750)’. Journal of the
History of Ideas, 29(2), 279–92.
Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., et al. (2017). ‘Mastering the game of Go without
human knowledge’. Nature, 550(7676), 354–9.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). ‘Gorillas in our midst: sustained inattentional blindness
for dynamic events’. Perception, 28(9), 1059–74.

Solms, M. (2018). ‘The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy principle’. Frontiers in
Physiology, 9, 2714.
Solms, M. (2021). The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness. London: Profile
Books.
Stein, B. E., & Meredith, M. A. (1993). The Merging of the Senses. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Steiner, A. P., & Redish, A. D. (2014). ‘Behavioral and neurophysiological correlates of regret in
rat decision-making on a neuroeconomic task’. Nature Neuroscience, 17(7), 995–1002.
Sterling, P. (2012). ‘Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation’. Physiology and Behavior,
106(1), 5–15.
Stetson, C., Fiesta, M. P., & Eagleman, D. M. (2007). ‘Does time really slow down during a
frightening event?’ PLoS One, 2(12), e1295.
Stoelb, B. L., Molton, I. R., Jensen, M. P., et al. (2009). ‘The efficacy of hypnotic analgesia in
adults: a review of the literature’. Contemporary Hypnosis, 26(1), 24–39.
Stoljar, D. (2017). ‘Physicalism’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2017 edn). plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2017/entries/physicalism/.
Strawson, G. (2008). Real Materialism and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strycker, N. (2014). The Thing with Feathers: The Surprising Lives of Birds and What They
Reveal about Being Human. New York, NY: Riverhead Books.
Suárez-Pinilla, M., Nikiforou, K., Fountas, Z., et al. (2019). ‘Perceptual content, not physiological
signals, determines perceived duration when viewing dynamic, natural scenes’. Collabra
Psychology, 5(1), 55.
Sun, Z., & Firestone, C. (2020). ‘The dark room problem’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(5),
346–8.
Sutherland, S. (1989). International Dictionary of Psychology. New York: Crossroad Classic.
Suzuki, K., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., & Seth, A. K. (2013). ‘Multisensory integration
across exteroceptive and interoceptive domains modulates self-experience in the rubber-hand
illusion’. Neuropsychologia, 51(13), 2909–17.
Suzuki, K., Roseboom, W., Schwartzman, D. J., & Seth, A. K. (2017). ‘A deep-dream virtual
reality platform for studying altered perceptual phenomenology’. Scientific Reports, 7(1),
15982.
Suzuki, K., Schwartzman, D. J., Augusto, R., & Seth, A. K. (2019). ‘Sensorimotor contingency
modulates breakthrough of virtual 3D objects during a breaking continuous flash suppression
paradigm’. Cognition, 187, 95–107.
Suzuki, K., Wakisaka, S., & Fujii, N. (2012). ‘Substitutional reality system: a novel experimental
platform for experiencing alternative reality’. Scientific Reports, 2, 459.
Swanson, L. R. (2016). ‘The predictive processing paradigm has roots in Kant’. Frontiers in
Systems Neuroscience, 10, 79.
Teasdale, G. M., & Murray, L. (2000). ‘Revisiting the Glasgow Coma Scale and Coma Score’.
Intensive Care Medicine, 26(2), 153–4.
Teufel, C., & Fletcher, P. C. (2020). ‘Forms of prediction in the nervous system’. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 21(4), 231–42.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thompson, E. (2014). Waking, Dreaming, Being: Self and Consciousness in Neuroscience,
Meditation, and Philosophy. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Timmermann, C., Roseman, L., Schartner, M., et al. (2019). ‘Neural correlates of the DMT
experience assessed with multivariate EEG’. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 16324.
Tong, F. (2003). ‘Out-of-body experiences: from Penfield to present’. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(3), 104–6.

Tononi, G. (2008). ‘Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional manifesto’. Biological
Bulletin, 215(3), 216–42.
Tononi, G. (2012). ‘Integrated information theory of consciousness: an updated account’.
Archives italiennes de biologie, 150(4), 293–329.
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., et al. (2016). ‘Integrated information theory: from
consciousness to its physical substrate’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17(7), 450–61.
Tononi, G., & Edelman, G. M. (1998). ‘Consciousness and complexity’. Science, 282(5395),
1846–51.
Tononi, G., & Koch, C. (2015). ‘Consciousness: here, there and everywhere?’ Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 370(1668).
Tononi, G., Sporns, O., & Edelman, G. M. (1994). ‘A measure for brain complexity: relating
functional segregation and integration in the nervous system’. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 91(11), 5033–7.
Trujillo, C. A., Gao, R., Negraes, P. D., et al. (2019). ‘Complex oscillatory waves emerging from
cortical organoids model early human brain network development’. Cell Stem Cell, 25(4),
558–69 e557.
Tschantz, A., Barca, L., Maisto, D., et al. (2021). ‘Simulating homeostatic, allostatic and goaldirected forms of interoceptive control using active inference’.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.16.431365v1
Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Seth, A. K., et al. (2020a). ‘Reinforcement learning through active
inference’. doi:https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.12636.
Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K., & Buckley, C. (2020b). ‘Learning action-oriented models’. PLoS
Computational Biology, 16(4), e1007805.
Tsuchiya, N., Wilke, M., Frässle, S., et al. (2015). ‘No-report paradigms: extracting the true neural
correlates of consciousness’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(12), 757–70.
Tulving, E. (1985). ‘Memory and consciousness’. Canadian Psychology, 26, 1–12.
Turing, A. M. (1950). ‘Computing machinery and intelligence’. Mind, 59, 433–60.
Uexküll, J. v. (1957). ‘A stroll through the worlds of animals and men: a picture book of invisible
worlds’. In C. Schiller (ed.), Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a Modern Concept,
New York: International Universities Press, 5.
van Giesen, L., Kilian, P. B., Allard, C. A. H., et al. (2020). ‘Molecular basis of chemotactile
sensation in octopus’. Cell, 183(3), 594–604 e514.
van Rijn, H., Gu, B. M., & Meck, W. H. (2014). ‘Dedicated clock/timing-circuit theories of time
perception and timed performance’. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, 829,
75–99.
Varela, F. J. (1996). ‘Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the hard problem’.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3, 330–50.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1993). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and
Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Walker, M. (2017). Why We Sleep. New York: Scribner.
Waller, B. (2011). Against Moral Responsibility. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wearing, D. (2005). Forever Today: A Memoir of Love and Amnesia. London: Corgi.
Wegner, D. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weiser, T. G., Regenbogen, S. E., Thompson, K. D., et al. (2008). ‘An estimation of the global
volume of surgery: a modelling strategy based on available data’. Lancet, 372(9633), 139–44.
Wheeler, J. A. (1989). ‘Information, physics, quantum: The search for links’. In Proceedings III
International Symposium on Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Tokyo, 354–8.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and Machine.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiener, N. (1964). God and Golem, Inc. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Williford, K., Bennequin, D., Friston, K., et al. (2018). ‘The projective consciousness model and
phenomenal selfhood’. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 2571.
Winn, J., & Bishop, C. M. (2005). ‘Variational message passing’. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 6, 661–94.
Wittmann, M. (2013). ‘The inner sense of time: how the brain creates a representation of
duration’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(3), 217–23.
Witzel, C., Racey, C., & O’Regan, J. K. (2017). ‘The most reasonable explanation of “the dress”:
Implicit assumptions about illumination’. Journal of Vision, 17(2), 1.
Xiao, Q., & Gunturkun, O. (2009). ‘Natural split-brain? Lateralized memory for task
contingencies in pigeons’. Neuroscience Letters, 458(2), 75–8.
Zamariola, G., Maurage, P., Luminet, O., et al. (2018). ‘Interoceptive accuracy scores from the
heartbeat counting task are problematic: Evidence from simple bivariate correlations’.
Biological Psychology, 137, 12–17.
Zucker, M. (1945), The Philosophy of American History, vol. 1: The Historical Field Theory.
New York: Arnold-Howard.

Index
action: perception and, 1, 2;
voluntary, 1, 2, 3, 4
active inference: actions, 1;
concept, 1, 2;
control-oriented perception, 1, 2;
free energy principle (FEP), 1, 2;
generative modelling, 1, 2;
interoceptive inference, 1, 2;
minimising prediction error, 1, 2, 3, 4;
robot design, 1;
role in learning, 1;
in social perception, 1, 2
Adelson’s Checkerboard, 1, 2
‘affordances’, 1, 2, 3
AI (artificial intelligence): attitudes to, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
cybernetics, 1;
development, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
Geminoids, 1;
machine consciousness, 1 (Fig. 21), 2;
Singularity hypothesis, 1, 2;
text generation, 1;
Turing test, 1
Alexander, Scott, 1
algorithmic complexity, 1, 2, 3
allostasis, 1, 2
anaesthesia, general: algorithmic complexity analyses, 1, 2;
art of, 1;
effects, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
effects on mammals, 1;
level of consciousness, 1, 2, 3, 4
animals, non-human: brain activity, 1;
Cartesian view, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
consciousness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
consciousness and intelligence, 1 (Fig. 21);
criminal responsibility, 1 (Fig. 20);
cybernetics, 1;
embodied selfhood, 1;
expression of emotions, 1;
free will, 1, 2;
interoceptive inference, 1;

self–recognition (mirror test), 1, 2, 3;
selfhood, 1;
sleep patterns, 1;
social perception, 1;
see also monkeys, octopus
Anscombe, Elizabeth, 1
Aristotle, 1n
Aron, Arthur, 1, 2n
arousal, 1, 2, 3,
see also wakefulness
Ashby, William Ross, 1, 2, 3
Aspell, Jane, 1
Ava (in Ex Machina), 1, 2, 3
awareness: animal, 1;
bodiless, 1;
conscious level, 1, 2 (Fig. 1), 3;
detecting residual, 1, 2, 3;
‘islands of’, 1;
mystery of, 1;
self-awareness, 1, 2, 3
Baars, Bernard, 1, 2
Barnes, Julian, 1
Barrett, Adam, 1, 2, 3
Barrett, Lisa Feldman, 1n, 2, 3
Bauby, Jean-Dominique, 1
Bayes, Thomas, 1
Bayesian: beliefs, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
best guessing, 1, 2, 3, 4 (Fig. 9), 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16;
inference, 1, 2, 3 (Fig. 9), 4, 5;
rule, 1, 2, 3, 4;
theorem, 1, 2;
theories of the brain, 1
beast machine theory:
consciousness and being alive, 1, 2, 3, 4;
core of, 1, 2, 3;
final step in, 1;
free energy principle (FEP), 1, 2, 3, 4;
importance of interoceptive inference, 1;
influences on, 1;
robots and AI, 1, 2, 3;
view of selfhood, 1, 2
beast machines: Cartesian view of animals, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
humans as, 1, 2, 3
beholder’s share, 1, 2, 3, 4
Berger, John, 1
Berkeley, Bishop George, 1
binocular rivalry, 1, 2, 3

birds, 1, 2
bispectral index monitors, 1
Blade Runner (film), 1, 2
Blanke, Olaf, 1, 2
body ownership, 1 (Fig. 17), 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
‘body swap’ illusion, 1, 2, 3
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 1, 2n
Bostrom, Nick, 1, 2
brain: ‘action first’ view of, 1, 2;
activity patterns, 1;
activity in psychedelic state, 1;
amygdala, 1;
auditory cortex, 1;
avian, 1;
brainstem, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
cerebellum, 1, 2, 3;
cerebral cortex, 1, 2, 3;
hemispheres, 1n, 2, 3, 4;
hemispherotomy, 1;
hippocampus, 1;
imaging methods, 1;
inferotemporal cortex, 1;
injuries, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
insular cortex, 1;
mammalian, 1, 2;
motor cortex, 1, 2;
parahippocampal gyrus, 1n;
prediction machine, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
split, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
supplementary motor area, 1n;
thalamocortical system, 1, 2;
thalamus, 1, 2;
view of, 1;
visual cortex, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
Buckley, Chris, 1
Cambridge University, 1, 2
Čapek, Karel, 1
Carhart-Harris, Robin, 1, 2, 3
Carter, Michael, 1
causality, 1, 2, 3
cerebral organoids, 1
Cézanne, Paul, 1, 2
Chalmers, David, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Chang, Hasok, 1
change blindness, 1, 2
Chassenée, Bartholomew, 1
chatbots, 1

colour: best guessing, 1;
‘change blindness’, 1;
The Dress, 1;
experience of, 1, 2, 3;
experiences of redness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
‘grapheme-colour synaesthesia’, 1;
Humean projections, 1;
octopus, 1;
predictions about, 1;
shape and, 1, 2
coma, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
complexity: algorithmic, 1, 2, 3, 4;
of brain, 1, 2;
measures of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
relation between complexity and regularity, 1 (Fig. 2)
Conant, Roger, 1
conscious content: concept, 1, 2;
‘deep structure’ of perception, 1;
emotions and moods, 1;
machine consciousness, 1;
mammalian species, 1;
perceptual predictions, 1;
psychedelic state, 1;
relationship with conscious level, 1, 2
conscious level: brain dynamics and, 1;
concept, 1, 2;
IIT, 1, 2, 3;
measuring, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8;
relation between conscious level and wakefulness, 1 (Fig. 1);
relationship with conscious content, 1, 2;
see also awareness
conscious country, 1, 2
conscious self, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
consciousness: animal, 1;
artificial, 1;
‘autonoetic’, 1;
awareness, see awareness; behavioural properties, 1, 2, 3;
brain basis of, 1, 2, 3;
contents, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8;
covert, 1, 2;
definition, 1;
easy problem (s), 1, 2;
functional properties, 1, 2, 3;
hard problem, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13;
informative and integrated, 1;
integrated information theory, see IIT; intelligence and, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (Fig. 21), 6, 7, 8, 9;
levels of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
machine, 1, 2, 3, 4;

mechanistic properties, 1, 2;
meta-problem, 1;
meter(s), 1, 2, 3, 4;
neural correlates of, see NCC; neuroscience of, 1, 2;
non-unified, 1;
organoid, 1;
phenomenological properties, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
real problem, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14;
science of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9;
what is it?, 1, 2
continuous flash suppression experiment, 1 (Fig. 10), 2
controlled hallucination(s): of being you, 1;
concept of the beholder’s share, 1;
contents of consciousness, 1, 2;
emotions and moods, 1, 2;
experience of change, 1;
experiences of body ownership, 1, 2;
experiences of time, 1;
forms of brain-based prediction, 1, 2;
free energy principle (FEP) and, 1, 2, 3;
interoceptive perception, 1;
living within, 1;
perception as, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
perceptual best guesses, 1;
perceptual expectations, 1;
prediction error minimisation, 1;
purpose of perception, 1;
readiness potentials, 1;
selfhood, 1, 2, 3;
synthetic, 1;
top-down predictions, 1, 2, 3;
volition, 1, 2
Copernican revolution, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Copernicus, 1, 2
Cotard, Jules, 1
Crick, Francis, 1
cricket ball, catching, 1
Critchley, Hugo, 1
cybernetics, 1, 2, 3
Dalencé, Joachim, 1
Damasio, Antonio, 1n
Darwin, Charles, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
de Lange, Floris, 1
‘deep dream’ algorithm, 1, 2
Degas, Edgar, 1
Dehaene, Stanislas, 1
delirium, hospital-induced, 1, 2, 3

demand characteristics, 1
Dennett, Daniel, 1, 2, 3
Descartes, René, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
determinism, 1, 2, 3
Dienes, Zoltán, 1
Donders Institute, Nijmegen, 1
Donne, John, 1
Dostoevsky, Fyodor, 1n
dreaming: consciousness during, 1, 2, 3;
‘deep dream’ algorithm, 1, 2;
level of consciousness, 1;
lucid, 1n;
REM sleep, 1;
waking dream, 1
The Dress, 1, 2, 3
dualism, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Dutton, Donald, 1, 2n
Eagleman, David, 1
Edelman, David, 1, 2
Edelman, Gerald, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
EEG (electroencephalography):
high time resolution, 1;
monitoring brain surgery, 1;
tracking brain activity, 1, 2, 3;
volition experiments, 1 (Fig. 19)
Ehrenfest, Paul, 1n
Ehrsson, Henrik, 1
Einstein, Albert, 1, 2
El Greco, 1
emotions: in animals, 1;
appraisal theories, 1;
aspects of embodied selfhood, 1, 2;
control-oriented perceptions, 1, 2, 3;
interoceptive inference, 1;
perception, 1;
perceptions of changes in bodily state, 1;
range of, 1, 2;
social perception, 1;
theories, 1, 2
entropy, 1, 2, 3, 4;
sensory, 1, 2
essential variables, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Euclid, 1
Evans, E. P., 1
evolution: colour recognition, 1;
consciousness, 1;
controlled hallucination view of perceptual world, 1, 2;

Darwinian theory, 1, 2;
emergence of consciousness, 1;
emotions, 1;
free energy principle (FEP), 1;
selfhood, 1, 2;
staying alive, 1, 2, 3
Ex Machina (film), 1, 2, 3
exteroception, 1
exteroceptive sensory signals, 1, 2
faces of people who never existed, 1 (Fig. 23)
FEP, see free energy principle
Fiorito, Graziano, 1, 2
fish, 1
fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging), 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Frankenstein (Mary Shelley), 1
free energy, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
free energy principle (FEP):
‘being a self’, 1;
boundaries (Markov blankets), 1, 2;
‘dark room problem’, 1, 2;
existence in state of low entropy, 1;
minimising sensory entropy, 1;
minimising sensory prediction error, 1;
relationship to beast machine theory, 1, 2;
relationship to IIT, 1;
‘theory of everything’, 1, 2
free will: animals, 1, 2;
determinism and, 1, 2, 3;
experience of volition, 1;
experiences of, 1, 2;
feeling we ‘could have done it differently’, 1;
Libet’s volition experiment, 1 (Fig. 19);
selfhood, 1, 2, 3;
‘spooky’, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
voluntary action, 1
Freud, Sigmund, 1, 2
Friston, Karl, 1, 2, 3, 4
Frith, Chris, 1
‘full body illusion’, 1 (Fig. 18), 2, 3
functionalism, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
GANNs (generative adversarial neural networks), 1
Garland, Alex, 1, 2
Garland test, 1, 2, 3, 4
Geminoids, 1 (Fig. 22), 2, 3
Gibson, James, 1, 2
‘global workspace’ theory, 1, 2

golem, 1, 2, 3
Gombrich, Ernst, 1, 2
Good Regulator Theorem, 1, 2
gorilla: ‘inattentional blindness’ to, 1, 2;
‘seeing a gorilla’, 1, 2, 3, 4
GPT-3 (artificial neural network), 1, 2, 3
Gregory, Richard, 1
Haggard, Patrick, 1
HAL (in 2001), 1, 2
hallucination machine, 1 (Fig. 12), 2, 3, 4, 5
hallucinations: autoscopic, 1;
controlled, see controlled hallucinations;
controlling, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
everything as, 1;
heautoscopic (doppelgänger), 1;
LSD, 1;
perceptual, 1
Heilbron, Micha, 1
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 1
Heraclitus, 1n
‘higher-order thought’ theory, 1
Hofmann, Albert, 1, 2, 3, 4
Hohwy, Jakob, 1
Hume, David, 1, 2
hypnotic suggestibility, 1, 2, 3
Ibn al Haytham, 1
idealism, 1
IIT (integrated information theory): axioms, 1;
claims, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
debate, 1, 2;
information, 1, 2, 3, 4;
integration, 1, 2;
interpretations, 1, 2;
measuring conscious level, 1;
Φ measure, 1, 2, 3, 4;
predictions, 1, 2, 3;
relationship to FEP, 1, 2;
versions, 1, 2
illusionism, 1
illusions: Adelson’s Checkerboard, 1, 2;
body ownership, 1;
‘body swap’, 1, 2, 3;
The Dress, 1, 2;
‘full body’, 1 (Fig. 18), 2, 3;
perceptual, 1;
‘Rotating snakes’, 1 (Fig. 15);

rubber hand, 1 (Fig. 17), 2, 3, 4;
waterfall, 1
inference: active, see active inference; perceptual, see perceptual inference
information: informative conscious experiences, 1;
integration and, 1,
see also IIT;
intrinsic, 1, 2, 3;
observer-relative, 1, 2, 3;
reliability, 1, 2;
sensory, 1, 2, 3;
theory, 1n, 2, 3n, 4, 5;
visual, 1;
what is it?, 1, 2, 3, 4
information processing, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
insects, 1
instantiation, 1, 2
intelligence: artificial, see AI;
birds, 1;
consciousness and, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (Fig. 21), 6, 7, 8, 9;
measuring, 1;
octopus, 1, 2
intention(s): awareness of, 1;
conscious, 1, 2, 3, 4;
intentional inhibition, 1;
perception of others’, 1;
selfhood, 1, 2;
urges and, 1
interoception, 1, 2, 3
interoceptive: inference, 1, 2;
predictions, 1, 2, 3, 4;
sensory signals, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5n
Ishiguro, Hiroshi, 1 (Fig. 22), 2
Jain, Ramesh, 1n
James, William, 1, 2
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1
Kanai, Ryota, 1n
Kandel, Eric, 1, 2
Kant, Immanuel, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Kelvin, Lord, 1
Kim, Chang-Sub, 1
Koch, Christof, 1, 2
Kuhn, Thomas, 1
Kurzweil, Ray, 1
La Mettrie, Julien Offray de, 1, 2, 3
Lakatos, Imre, 1

Lange, Carl, 1
language, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 1
learning, 1
Leary, Timothy, 1
Libet, Benjamin, 1 (Fig. 19), 2
life, scientific understanding of, 1
living systems: free energy principle (FEP), 1, 2;
properties, 1, 2;
self-maintenance, 1
Locke, John, 1
locked-in syndrome, 1, 2n, 3
Loew ben Bezalel, Rabbi Judah, 1
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), 1, 2
Lush, Peter, 1
LZW complexity (Lempel-Ziv-Welch complexity), 1, 2, 3, 4
McEwan, Ian, 1, 2
McGinn, Colin, 1
McGregor, Simon, 1
Mach, Ernst, 1, 2 (Fig. 16)
Magritte, René, 1 (Fig. 13)
Mariola, Alberto, 1
Markov blanket, 1, 2
Marr, David, 1
Masood, Daanish, 1
Massimini, Marcello, 1, 2, 3
materialism, 1;
eliminative, 1
measurement, 1, 2
Mediano, Pedro, 1
MEG (magnetoencephalography), 1
memories: amnesia, 1;
‘being a self’, 1, 2, 3;
being you, 1;
early, 1;
selfhood, 1, 2, 3, 4
metacognition, 1, 2, 3
Metzinger, Thomas, 1, 2
minimally conscious state, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Monet, Claude, 1, 2
monkeys, 1, 2
Monti, Martin, 1
moods: aspects of embodied selfhood, 1, 2;
control-oriented perceptions, 1, 2, 3;
interoceptive inference, 1;
perception, 1
Mooney image, 1 (Fig. 6), 2 (Fig. 7)

Mori, Masahiro, 1
Müller, Johannes, 1
Muotri, Alysson, 1
Muthukumaraswamy, Suresh, 1
mysterianism, 1
Nagel, Thomas, 1
NCC (neural correlates of consciousness), 1, 2, 3, 4
neurons: awareness of, 1;
bottom-up view of perception, 1;
cerebellum, 1, 2;
cerebral cortex, 1, 2;
‘cerebral organoids’, 1;
connections, 1, 2n;
degree of activity, 1;
IIT implications, 1;
information and integration, 1, 2;
maximally random activity, 1;
measurement of activity, 1n;
‘mirror’, 1;
network, 1;
number, 1n, 2, 3, 4;
octopus, 1, 2;
serotonin system, 1
neurophenomenology, 1, 2
Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, 1, 2
objecthood, 1, 2, 3
octopus: brains, 1;
camouflage, 1;
consciousness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
intelligence, 1, 2;
nervous system, 1;
perception, 1, 2;
research, 1, 2;
RNA sequences, 1
optogenetics, 1
out-of-body experiences (OBEs), 1, 2
‘out-of-body-like’ experiences, 1, 2, 3, 4
Owen, Adrian, 1
pain, 1, 2, 3, 4
panpsychism, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
pareidolia, 1 (Fig. 11)
Pasteur, Louis, 1
PCI (perturbational complexity index), 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Penfield, Wilder, 1
perception: accurate (veridical), 1, 2;

action and, 1, 2;
of bodily changes, 1;
as bottom-up feature detection, 1 (Fig. 3), 2;
of change, 1 (Fig. 15), 2;
changing, 1;
concept of the beholder’s share, 1;
conscious, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10;
control-oriented, 1, 2, 3;
as controlled hallucination, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10;
‘deep structure’ of, 1;
different kinds of, 1;
emotion and mood, 1, 2, 3, 4;
exteroceptive, 1, 2;
flow of perceptions, 1;
forming, 1, 2;
influence of predictions on, 1, 6), 2;
interoceptive, 1, 2;
interoceptive inference, 1;
mechanisms of, 1;
nested, 1;
as neural ‘hypothesis-testing’, 1;
of objecthood, 1;
octopus, 1, 2;
‘perceptual control theory’, 1;
perceptual expectations, 1, 6), 2, 3;
predictive, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10;
predictive processing, 1, 2;
of ‘reality’, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
proprioception, 1, 2, 3n;
role of precision weighting, 1;
of self, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10;
self-related, 1, 2, 3, 4;
social, 1, 2;
of time, 1, 2, 3;
top-down inference, 1, 2 (Fig. 4), 3, 4;
unconscious, 1;
varieties of, 1
perceptual inference: Bayesian principles, 1, 2, 3;
brain’s adjustment of, 1 (Fig. 5), 2;
causality, 1;
controlling interior of body, 1;
experience of change, 1, 2, 3;
experience of the-self-as-really-existing, 1;
finding out things, 1, 2;
first-person perspective, 1;
Helmholtz’s work, 1;
Impressionist landscapes, 1;
improving, 1;

mental states of other people, 1;
seeming-to-be, 1;
volition and, 1, 2
Petzschner, Frederike, 1
phantom limb syndrome, 1, 2
phenomenological: aspects of vision, 1, 2;
character of any specific conscious experience, 1;
character of ‘being real’, 1, 2, 3;
control, 1;
properties of conscious perception, 1, 2;
properties of consciousness, 1, 2, 3, 4
phenomenology: of alternative possibilities, 1;
of being real, 1;
‘computational’, 1;
of all conscious experiences, 1;
of emotions and moods, 1, 2;
experiences of ‘being a self’, 1;
and free energy principle (FEP), 1;
of hallucination, 1;
‘hard problem of consciousness’, 1, 2;
Nagel’s approach, 1;
of normal conscious perception, 1;
of objecthood, 1, 2, 3, 4;
perceptual, 1;
properties of, 1;
‘redness’, 1;
subjective properties of conscious experience, 1;
‘synthetic’, 1;
of volition, 1, 2
physicalism, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Picasso, Pablo, 1
Pinto, Yair, 1
Pissarro, Camille, 1, 2
Plato, 1
Popper, Karl, 1
Powers, William, 1
prediction(s): active inference, 1;
‘best guesses’, 1, 2;
bottom-up, 1, 2;
brain-based, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
brain as prediction machine, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
conditional, 1, 2, 3n, 4, 5, 6;
controlled hallucination view, 1, 2, 3;
error minimisation, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
errors, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8;
of IIT, 1, 2;
influence on perception, 1, 2;
interoceptive, 1, 2, 3, 4;

neurally encoded, 1;
perceptual, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13;
predictive control, 1;
proprioceptive, 1;
sensorimotor, 1;
sensory prediction error, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
temperature control, 1;
top-down, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
predictive processing: active inference, 1, 2;
minimising sensory prediction error, 1, 2;
relationship to free energy principle (FEP), 1, 2, 3;
robot control, 1;
term, 1;
theory, 1, 2, 3
Price, Richard, 1
probability distribution, 1 (Figs. 8, 9), 2
proprioception, 1, 2, 3n
psychedelia, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
qualia, 1, 2
readiness potential, 1, 2
reality: hallucinations and, 1, 2;
instantiation, 1;
mind-independent, 1, 2, 3;
objective, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
perception of, 1, 2, 3;
physiological, 1;
self-unreality, 1;
source of, 1;
substitutional, 1;
virtual, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Riegl, Alois, 1
Robbins, Apollo, 1
robots: attitudes to, 1, 2;
consciousness issue, 1, 2;
Geminoids, 1;
Turing test, 1
Roseboom, Warrick, 1
rubber hand illusion, 1 (Fig. 17), 2, 3, 4
Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, University of Sussex, 1, 2
Sacks, Oliver, 1, 2
Schartner, Michael, 1, 2
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 1
Schurger, Aaron, 1
Science, 1, 2, 3
Scott, Ridley, 1, 2

sea squirt, 1n
self: conception of, 1, 2, 3;
conscious, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
embodied, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
experience of ‘being a self’, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
‘mirror self-recognition’, 1;
narrative, 1, 2, 3;
personal identity, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8;
perspectival, 1, 2 (Fig. 16), 3;
social, 1, 2, 3, 4;
subjective stability of the, 1, 2;
volitional, 1, 2
self-change-blindness, 1, 2, 3
self-maintenance, 1
selfhood: Bayesian best guesses, 1, 2;
beast machine view of, 1, 2, 3;
being-a-self, 1, 2;
change blindness, 1, 2;
conscious, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
‘ego dissolution’, 1;
embodied, 1, 2, 3, 4;
essence of, 1, 2;
experiences of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
experiences of unified, 1;
experiences of volition, 1, 2;
first-person perspective, 1, 2;
‘free will’, 1;
layers of, 1, 2, 3;
levels of, 1, 2, 3;
memory, 1;
monkeys, 1, 2;
robot, 1;
self-awareness, 1;
social, 1;
subjective body ownership, 1, 2
sensory prediction error, minimisation of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Shannon, Claude, 1
Sherman, Maxine, 1
Shugg, Wallace, 1
Simons, Daniel, 1
simulation, 1, 2, 3
‘sine wave speech’, 1, 2
‘Singularity’ hypothesis, 1 (Fig. 21), 2, 3
Slater, Mel, 1
sleep: dreamless, 1, 2, 3, 4;
early, 1;
lack of, 1;
mammalian brain activity, 1;

REM (rapid eye movement), 1, 2;
waking from, 1, 2;
see also dreaming
somatoparaphrenia, 1, 2
souls, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
split brain, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Strawson, Galen, 1
Sussex University, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Sutherland, Stuart, 1
Suzuki, Keisuke, 1, 2, 3
synaesthesia, grapheme-colour, 1
teletransportation, 1, 2, 3, 4
Terminator (film), 1
time: entropy, 1;
perception of, 1, 2, 3;
‘self-change-blindness’, 1, 2
TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation), 1, 2
Tononi, Giulio, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
Turing test, 1, 2, 3
twins, craniopagus, 1
2001: A Space Odyssey (film), 1, 2
‘uncanny valley’, 1, 2
vegetative state: communication with patient, 1, 2;
level of consciousness, 1, 2, 3, 4;
measuring consciousness, 1, 2, 3, 4;
recovery from, 1
Vienna Circle, 1
virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR), 1, 2, 3
virtual body swapping, 1
virtual objects, 1 (Fig. 14)
virtual reality (VR), 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
vitalism, 1, 2, 3, 4
volition, 1, 2;
brain basis of, 1, 2, 3;
experiences of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
experiment, 1 (Fig. 19);
phenomenology of, 1
wakefulness (arousal), 1, 2 (Fig. 1), 3, 4
Waller, Bruce, 1n, 2
Wearing, Clive, 1
Wearing, Deborah, 1
Wegner, Daniel, 1
Westworld (TV series), 1
Wheeler, John, 1

Whitman, Charles, 1
Wiener, Norbert, 1, 2
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1, 2, 3, 4
xenomelia, 1, 2
‘zap and zip’ approach, 1
zombie thought experiment, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6

About the Author
Anil Seth is a leading British researcher in the field of consciousness
science. He is Professor of Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience at
the University of Sussex, Co-Director of the Canadian Institute for
Advanced Research’s Program on Brain, Mind and Consciousness, and a
European Research Council Advanced Investigator. Seth has published
over 160 academic papers and is recognised as a ‘highly cited’
researcher, placing him in the top one per cent of researchers by field. A
Wellcome Trust Engagement Fellow, his writing has appeared in New
Scientist, Scientific American, the Guardian and Granta, and he features
regularly in the media, including on Radio 4’s The Life Scientific. His
TED talk on consciousness has been viewed over 11 million times.
@anilkseth | www.anilseth.com

Copyright
This ebook edition first published in the UK in 2021
by Faber & Faber Ltd
Bloomsbury House
74–77 Great Russell Street
London WC1B 3DA
All rights reserved
© Anil Seth, 2021
The right of Anil Seth to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with
Section 77 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
‘Creep’ Words & Music by Colin Greenwood, Jonathan Greenwood, Edward O’Brien, Philip
Selway, Thomas Yorke, Albert Hammond & Mike Hazlewood, copyright © 1996 Concord Songs
Limited. All Rights Reserved. International Copyright Secured. Used by permission of Hal
Leonard Europe Limited and Warner Chappell Music
Graphs and line illustrations by Steve West at LazyChief
Cover design by Faber
Cover image from Shutterstock
This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, distributed,
leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as specifically permitted in
writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised distribution or
use of this text may be a direct infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights, and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly
ISBN 978–0–571–33773–6

