D

Philosophy Study, February 2023, Vol. 13, No. 2, 68-77
doi: 10.17265/2159-5313/2023.02.003

DAVID

PUBLISHING

Self-Awareness, a Singularity of AI
Jinchang Wang
Stockton University, Galloway, New Jersey, USA
Self-awareness, or self-consciousness, refers to reflective recognition of the existence of “subjective-self”. Every
person has a subjective-self from which the person observes and interacts with the world. In this article, we argue
that self-consciousness is an enigmatic phenomenon unique in human intelligence. Unlike many other intelligent and
conscious capabilities, self-consciousness is not possible to be achieved in electronic computers and robots. Selfconsciousness is an odd-point of human intelligence and a singularity of artificial intelligence (AI). Man-made
intelligence through software is not capable of self-consciousness; therefore, robots will never become a newly
created species. Because of the lack of self-awareness, AI software, such as Watson, Alpha-zero, ChatGPT, and
PaLM, will remain a tool of humans and will not dominate the human society no matter how smart it is. This
singularity of AI makes us re-think humbly what the future AI is like, what kind of robots we are going to deal with,
and the blessing and threat of AI on humanity.
Keywords: Self-consciousness, Subjective-self, Singularity, AI, Robot, Machine Intelligence

Introduction
The era of artificial intelligence (AI) looms large with the progresses of computer technology. Computer
intelligence is catching up with, or surpassing, humans in intellectual capabilities. Sovereign of machine
intelligence looks imminent and unavoidable.
Computer’s intelligence has surprised people a couple of times in the past 70 years. In 1940s, computers
outperformed humans in numerical computations. In 1970s, computers showed their word/text processing ability.
Then, Deep-Blue, Alpha-go, and Alpha-zero beat best chess players in succession. Recent AI chatbots ChatGPT
and DaLL-E have stunned people with their competence in chatting, writing, knowledge integrating, and painting.
Computer capabilities have repeatedly broken people’s expectations of machine capabilities.
Progress of computer’s intelligence goes with computer’s speed. As computing speed increases, a computer
is able to handle larger amount of data and knowledge, evaluate more options, make better decisions, and learn
better from its own experience. Better computers enhance and extend the capability of the research for
making even better computers, which will accelerate the improvement of machine intelligence. Few doubt that
computers will be sentient, conscious, spiritual, self-motivated to learn by itself, and capable of duplicating itself.
Many take it for grant that AI is unlimited, and intelligent machine will become a self-sufficient and selfpropagable species.
The future of computer intelligence had been debated for more than 60 years since “artificial intelligence”
was coined as the title of the new field of computer science in 1956. At the center of the contention, it is the

Jinchang Wang, Ph.D., Professor, School of Business, Stockton University, Galloway, New Jersey, USA.

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

69

issue about whether the computer can possess all the intellectual capabilities of a human, in terms of intelligence,
consciousness, sentiment, mind, and spirit. Dualists have insisted that computer can never be spiritual
because computer is “fundamentally different from what compose our body” (Hawkins & Blakeslee, 2004, p. 5).
Many scientists, on the other hand, believe that a digital robot can become a “humanoid” as smart and
emotional as a human, because a human is nothing but a “meat machine” to the final analysis, and there is no
logical obstacle to have an “electronic machine” mimicking a “meat machine” (Minsky, 1986; Gilder & Richards,
2002).
Another issue in the contention is about how consciousness is achieved in computer. A few ways have been
put forward, such as direct programming, reverse engineering, and making system complicated enough so that
the soul emerges automatically (Kurzweil, 1999; Searle, 1997; Hofstadter, 1999; Penrose, 1999).
The third issue in the contention is about whether machine intelligence is a blessing or a threat to human
beings. Optimists insist that human beings will benefit from intelligent machines and live in a more enjoyable
life (Kurzweil, 1999). Pessimists are afraid that intelligent machines will take toll on human beings eventually.
Bill Joy, Stephen Hawking, and many scientists and philosophers warned the world about the cataclysmic fate of
humanity caused by the super-intelligent machines. They called for restraining the research on AI (Joy, 2000;
Hawking, 2014). Both optimists and pessimists share a same belief that future robots will be a new “life form”
of higher level of intelligence than humans. Their difference lies on the consequence of having such a smart life
form.
We in this article argue that computer intelligence is not unlimited. Self-awareness is a singularity
unachievable by the computer. Robots will not become a new life form or a new species because of this singularity.
A computer can never have the full range intelligence of a human, and will remain a tool of human beings. In
Section 2, we reason that self-consciousness is unachievable in a computer, and therefore is a singularity of AI.
Section 3 discusses implications of the singularity of AI, such as consciousnesses closely related to selfconsciousness, freewill and moral of robots, immortality of humans, legal responsibility of intelligent machines,
and the fate of humanity.

Subjective-Self Is a Singularity of AI
In this section, we argue that enigmatic subjective-self is a singularity of AI, which is beyond the reach
computer programming. A machine can never be self-aware.
Characteristics of Singularity
A singularity in mathematics refers to an odd point or singular point at which ordinary attributes do not
apply. For example, x = 0 is a singularity point of function f(x) = 1 / x because f(x) is continuous at every point
except for x = 0; and x = 1 is a singularity point of function f(x) = 2 + |x - 1| because f(x) is differentiable at every
value of x except for x = 1.
A singularity in the nature world refers to something which physics laws do not apply to. Examples include
a black hole in universe, the “status” before Big Bang 14 billion years ago from which our universe emerged, and
death for a person who dies. Singularity is an objective existence, unfathomable and explainable with our
knowledge. What happens inside a black hole, for example, is beyond our touch. We can “speculate” from the
outside with our knowledge that a black hole contains a huge mass in an infinitely small space, with infinite
density and gravity, and with infinitely curved space-time to a one-dimensional point, where the laws of physics

70

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

as we know cease to operate. We cannot do any observation and research inside a black hole to verify the
speculations, because anything, including light and electromagnetic wave, does not come out.
“Death” is a singularity of the process of life for a person who dies. “Death” is a reality everyone faces
sooner or later. Death of one’s own and death of someone else are fundamentally different. No one knows exactly
what happens after “his/her own death”. It is not researchable scientifically. What we can imagine are the eternal
darkness and emptiness after death where logic and physical laws do not make sense. For a particular person,
what “eternal darkness” and “eternal emptiness” are like and where they lead to are beyond logical imaginations.
Death for the person who dies is a singularity of the life process of that person.
Characteristics of Subjective-Self
Every person has a subjective-self from which s/he observes and experiences the world. A person’s name
and social security number are the person’s identity in the eyes of the others, therefore not her/his subjective-self.
Awareness of subjective-self can be tested in a “mirror test”, which is to see whether a subject recognizes its own
figure in a mirror. This test is for the low level of self-awareness, and a monkey may pass it. Self-awareness in
this article refers to the higher level self-awareness. It is identified by so-called “test of knowing death”, which
is to see whether the subject understands death in such a way that the world around the subject will be gone
forever after death. Only human passes the test (Wang, 2019). A human realizes that after he dies, he and
everything around him will disappear forever. No other animal on Earth passes the “test of knowing death”. Selfconsciousness is the recognition of the existence of such a higher level subjective-self from the first-person’s
standpoint.
Subjective-self has the following characteristics (Wang, 2016; 2019):
1. Subjective-self exists as an internal mental phenomenon. “I think therefore I am”. Self-awareness and
self-consciousness are cognitions of the existence of subjective-self.
2. “Myself” is unique. That is, for a particular person, there is one and only one subjective-self in this world.
3. “My-self” is unique all time. That is, for a particular person, his subjective-self did not exist before his
birth, and will not re-appear after his death.
4. Subjective-self and awareness of subjective-self cannot be copied.
5. Subjective-self defies scientific researches, because scientific researches are for the objective objects
instead of subjective phenomena.
Subjective-Self Is an Unachievable Singularity of AI
A computer can be programmed to gain intellectual capabilities, such as numerical calculating, memorizing,
logical reasoning, self-learning, decision making, visuality, audibility, language translating, speaking, and
navigating. The idea of Turing Test (Turing, 1950) tells that intelligence level of a machine is determined by the
performance of the machine, rather than the internal process. For example, we say a computer can do calculation
“32 times 15” because it can tell 480 as the result correctly. We do not care how the computer does the calculation
internally. Similarly, a computer is deemed intelligent if it beats a chess world master, even it “thinks” in the way
different from the chess master. A computer achieves human capabilities in an electronic way without emulating
human’s biochemical mechanism, as an airplane achieves the capability of “flying” without mimicking birds.
Based on this idea, we say a computer is “conscious” if it looks having feelings, without caring about the
electronical process inside the computer.

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

71

A computer is programmed to look to be conscious. Some robots have already been claimed to look
“conscious”. A robot-mop recharges itself automatically when its battery is low. It looks that the robot-mop has
the consciousness of “hunger” which is the internal signal for energy replenishment. The robot-mop catches the
signal of “hunger” and goes for recharging, just like a human feels hungry and finds food to eat. Many other
consciousnesses can be similarly realized in a computer by emulating.
Despite that many human consciousnesses can be “emulated” or “mimicked” through programming, one
piece of consciousnesses cannot be programmed. It is self-consciousness.
To prove subjective-self cannot be programmed, two “axioms” are used. The first is: subjective-self is
unitary. The second axiom is: Any executable computer program can be converted to equivalent 0-1 codes on the
tape of Turing Machine. The first axiom implies that subjective-self is not copiable. The second axiom implies
that a computer program is copiable since the tape of Turing Machine is copiable obviously. Therefore, copiable
computer programs cannot be used to code uncopiable subjective-self (Wang, 2016).
The above proving is tenable as far as the two axioms hold. The first axiom “any subjective-self is unitary”
is a consensus: “There is only one ‘I’ in this world”. Its trueness is obvious to everyone. The second axiom is
Church-Turing Thesis (Turing, 1950), which has been accepted in the computer field although it is not strictly
proved. The conclusion that “subjective-self cannot be programmed” therefore stands on a solid ground.
A robot can be programmed to declare, “I’m self-aware!” or “I understand that I’m unique in this world”.
But saying “I’m self-aware” does not mean the robot has achieved self-awareness. Such a declaration just shows
that the robot is programmed to lie, since the robot can never be self-aware. This fake self-consciousness is
different from a robot-mop being programmed to “feel hungry” and charge itself automatically. The signal of
“hungry”, battery-low, is genuine in a robot-mop when battery drops to the preset level. While claiming “I’m
self-aware” is claiming a non-existent thing, since subjective-self does not exist with a robot at all.
Stephen Wolfram hypothesized that all phenomena in this world are programmable, “Beneath all the
complex phenomena we see in physics there lies simple program which, if run for long enough, would reproduce
our universe in every detail” (Wolfram, 2002, p.35). His hypothesis was advocated by James Gardner,
“Wolfram’s software of everything would be the mother of all source codes, generating not only the movements
of stars and planets but also the emergence and evolution of life and intelligence” (Gardner, 2007, p. 12). This
“software of everything” thesis is the base of “strong AI”.
Subjective-self and self-consciousness do not belong to Wolfram’s “everything”. Everything can be
duplicated without causing logical contradiction, except for subjective-self. It is logically fine to program
intelligence and consciousness such as computation, reasoning, learning, artistic creativity, sentience, and
consciousness. But programming subjective-self would be logically prohibited. Subjective-self is therefore an
odd-point in intelligence/consciousness. No matter how smart an intelligent machine is, subjective-self is a
“forbidden blind-spot” which cannot be realized in a computer. Subjective-self is an unreachable singularity of
AI.

Implications of the Singularity of AI
In the last section, we reasoned that self-awareness, as a singularity of AI, is a blind-spot of machine
intelligence, which can never be achieved or realized in a computer. We next look at what it implies by this
singularity, what the future perspective of machine intelligence is like with the absence of subjective-self, and
how it will affect the humanity.

72

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

Self-Conscious Emotion (SCE), and Robot’s Soul and Spirit
Some consciousnesses of human are related to and dependent on self-awareness. They are called SelfConscious Emotions (SCE) (Tracy & Robins, 2004). Here are examples of SCE:
understanding death and fear of death
inspiration of exploring the unknown
self-respect
self-restraining
sense of expectation/frustration
sense of morality
sense of solemn
sense of dignity
keeping up with the Joneses

curiosity
regret
reverence
shyness
greed
pride
conscience
sense of nobleness
impulse to dominate

aggressiveness
glory,
embarrassment
faith
envy
guilt
shame
empathy
determination

Some SCEs are more closely related to subjective-self than the others. Wang categorized SCEs into two
groups, strong SCEs and weak SCEs (Wang, 2018). Some animals may have, arguably, some weak SCEs such
as aggressiveness and jealousness. But no animals have strong SCEs, such as regret, self-respect, dignity, sense
of nobleness and solemn, sense of morality, and inspiration of exploring the unknown.
Since self-awareness cannot be programmed in a computer, SCEs, especially strong-SCEs, cannot be
programmed either. Robots with no self-awareness would not understand death, and will have no sense of glory,
reverence, faith, conscience, shyness, and empathy. They will never have full range of human intelligence and
consciousness. Robots will never be “humans” like we are.
A soul contains mindful elements such as dignity, self-respect, self-restraining, dignity, conscience, glory,
shame, reverence, and sense of nobleness and solemn, which are all closed related to self-awareness. Without
these SCEs, a robot will be just a machine with no soul.
A robot may pretend to have SCEs, but it will never genuinely possess them. An individual robot pretending
to “fear death” would behave differently from a person who fears death deeply in the heart. “Bravery” will not
make sense to a robot because it is not fearful of the dangers to its “life”. A robot will be inherently apathetic
although they may pretend to be empathetic. A robot cannot be spiritual due to the singularity of AI, although it
may be programmed to “look” spiritual. A robot will not have genuine initiative to pursue the meaning of life as
humans have done for thousands of years. Religion does not belong to robots.
SCE is a portion of human consciousness. Many consciousnesses are not based on subjective-self, known
as non-SCEs, such as pain, hunger, thirst, fatigue, dread, sexual desire, tasting sweet or spicy, and sensation of
pleasure. While SCEs exist exclusively in humans who can reflectively cognize their being in the world, nonSCEs are found in both animals and humans. Since non-SCEs are not dependent on subjective-self, nothing
prevents a robot from possessing non-SCEs through programming. It is not impossible for a robot to “feel” hungry,
pain, angry, happy, and even to “fall in love”. But it is logically impossible for a robot to possess self-awareness
and the related SCEs.
Will Robots Become a New Species Dominating Humans
The robots in the future will be super-intelligent. They are not only millions of times faster than humans in
calculating and reasoning, but also intellectual in making decisions, translating languages, understanding a book,
driving a car, writing articles, drawing pictures, and learning by themselves. They will outsmart humans in many
aspects. However, they will not outplay humans in the aspects that require strong-SCEs.

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

73

Many scholars are seriously concerned about the future of human beings. They are afraid that, in the era of
AI, humanity’s fate will be at the mercy of the smarter robots. Stephen Hawking, Elon Masks, Bill Joys, and
hundreds of scientists addressed this deep concerns in an open letter in 2015 (Hawking, 2015). Their worries are
reasonable, considering that once robots became a species, then humans would be in big trouble. Between two
species, the one less intelligent is destined to be controlled and dominated by the more intelligent. Think of the
fate of pigs, tigers, and dogs in the current world dominated by humans. However, the singularity of AI implies
that what they worry will not come true. They may rest assured. Robots without self-awareness and SCEs will
not form a species and will not have internal driving force of dominating.
A necessary condition for something to become a “species” is its self-reproduction, which requires inherent
initiative and capability to propagate itself. Cars and computers are not species even though there are hundreds
of millions of them on Earth. That is because cars and computers do not have “internal desires” to reproduce
themselves. Their reproduction relies on human’s desire. Bees or elephants are a species. They have instinctive
impulse and capability of self-reproduction. The future robots do not have self-awareness and SCEs. They do not
fear to die and have no internal desire in self-reproduction. They will not form a species.
Moreover, robots do not have the SCE of “dominating” so that they will not cause a threat on human race.
Animals do not have sense of subjective-self, and they do not have driving force of dominating and controlling
other species on Earth. Lions attack individual preys when they are hungry. But they have no desire to dominate
the species of their preys. Except for human beings, no animals have the inherent impulse of dominating other
species and controlling the Earth. Neither do robots.
ChatGPT, the state-of-the-art language chatbot, signals a new stage of AI. It can write essays, articles,
computer codes, and poems. ChatGPT has once again aroused people of the threats of AI: What would people
do when computers could surpass us in writing and chatting, in addition to computing, playing chess, storing
knowledge, learning, and processing data? We are not sure how smart ChatGPT would be. But we are sure, due
to the singularity of AI, that ChatGPT is not a prototype of a new species of AI that will dominate human beings
someday. No matter how capable and knowledgeable ChatGPT can be, it will never be self-aware. It will remain
a tool of humans, as other AI software like Google Search, Watson, Alpha-go, and Alpha-zero.
Freewill and Moral of Robots
Freewill and sense of morality are two strong-SCEs which are closely related to self-awareness and selfconsciousness. Liberty is about “freedom of self”. Moral is about “restraint of self”. Without self-consciousness,
liberty and moral would make no sense. “Without liberty, a life is of no sense other than a tool” (John Locke).
Spiritual pursuit of liberty and meaning of life is found exclusively in self-conscious humans. Thinking about the
meaning of life requires awareness of subjective-self and capability of reflection. Humans have kept probing
“who I am”, “where I come from”, “why I am here”, “how I live”, “what is the meaning of my life” for thousands
of years. All these inquiries prerequire awareness of subjective-self.
Future robots are not self-aware; therefore, they will have no freewill, no desire for liberty, and no sense of
morality. There will be no religions among robots because they are not interested in pursuing the meaning of life
and death. Democracy or authoritarianism does not make sense to horses, dogs, and fish, neither to robots, due
to the absence of freewill. For the same token, robots by nature would not care about being “unfairly” treated.
Robot’s moral can be “injected” externally by the human programmers. But no moral would come from the
inside of robots initiatively. Robot’s moral is dependent on its human manufacturer.

74

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

Does AI Lead to Immortality
Living forever has become a topic in serious journals and periodicals, along with the progresses of AI. Some
believe that immortality is no longer a dream, which can be reached by reverse engineering, man-made chips and
parts, and AI software.
Kurzweil proposed a wild way of immortality: Scan and copy a person’s brain into a computer and rebuild
it after the person’s death, so as to make the person resurrect (Kurzweil, 2013). However, this method of “copying
brain” will not work, because if it worked, then multiple resurrected lives could be rebuilt based on the copy of
one person’s brain, which would contradict the uniqueness of a person’s subjective-self.
What if replacing human’s body and brain part by part? We have already had artificial parts in our bodies,
such as prosthetic arm/leg, denture, implanted breast, synthetic blood vessel and heart valve. Individuals with
hearing impairment or visual disability have been helped by implanted semiconductor chips in the head to
enhance aurality and eyesight. At the time when every failing or faulty part of one’s brain was replaced by an
artificial one, a person would become immortal.
To see this method of “gradual-replacement” does not work for immortality, let us consider two processes.
Process A is building a robot by “copying” a person P’s brain. Process B is replacing person P’s brain by chips
one by one. In Process B, person P’s brain starts with 0% artificial part, and ends up with 100% chips after his
original brain is fully replaced by chips. The brains as the results of Process B and Process A are same in terms
of outcome, which are the copy of the brain of person P. As we have reasoned above, the brain from Process A
does not have P’s subjective-self since subjective-self is not copiable. So, the brain built by Process B does not
have person P’s self-identity either. Although we do not know at what stage of Process B person P’s subjectiveself is lost, we are sure that at the end of Process B, P’s subjective-self is not there. Wang hypothesized,
subjective-self is something beyond our current knowledge, which looks to have a third mysterious constituent
unknown for us like dark matters or something in the higher dimension (Wang, 2019). Anyway, simply copying
or replacing physical parts of the brain cannot save a person from his/her own death, even though AI may extend
the life. Immortality remains a dream.
Who Takes Responsibility for What a Robot Does
Let’s take chatbot ChatGPT as an example of robots. Who takes responsibility for the remarks of defamation
of ChatGPT?—The chatbot or its developer? Obviously, at this stage of ChatGPT, its developer must take
responsibility.
But, what if ChatGPT “grows” up sometime in the future? The capability of ChatGPT comes mainly from
its self-learning. What ChatGPT says is not told directly by its developer. Its developer just teaches it how to
learn, instead of what to say. Parents are legally responsible for their child before the child becomes an adult.
Take ChatGPT as a child of its developer. At the “early age” of ChatGPT, its developer takes responsibility. The
growing process of ChatGPT is not fully under the control of its developer. Instead, it is dependent on its own
experience and self-learning, just like a child’s growing process. It seems that at certain point, ChatGPT should
take full responsibility of its own speech, as when a child becomes an adult.
However, not any “adult” takes legal responsibility for its behavior. An adult dog does not take legal
responsibility for its behavior. The owner of the dog does. That’s because even an adult dog is a not self-aware.
A self-aware human knows that “‘I’ do it therefore ‘I’ take the consequence of what ‘I’ do”. A dog does not have
such a sense of “I”.

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

75

A human child does not take responsibility for what he does, because a child’s self-consciousness is not
fully developed, until he becomes an adult. In the case of ChatGPT, it should take responsibility for what it says
when it possesses self-consciousness. However, as computer software, ChatGPT will never be self-aware!
Therefore, ChatGPT will never take responsibility for what it says. Its developer does.
Is a Robot a Juridical Person
Is “killing a robot” a crime of murdering? Is letting robots do dirty and dangerous jobs “discrimination”?
Does a robot have its “robot-rights”? The answers are “no”. Robots are not self-conscious. They are tools without
soul. Destroying a tool is not murdering. Taking robots as “slaves” is not enslaving and discrimination. A robot
without self-awareness is not a human. It is treated a tool such as a calculator, a TV set, and a laptop computer.
Self-awareness is a prerequisite for the sense of justice which underlies a human society’s moral and legal
systems. Due to the singularity of AI, robots will not have the sense of moral and the desire for rule of law. Our
juridical system will never be appliable to robots, despite they look like us and are more intelligent than us.
The Threat of AI Comes From the Humans Who Use AI
Digital robots are expected to be supersmart. Their intelligence level can be millions of times better than
humans in computation, logical reasoning, and decision making. They may look like humans in aspects of
speaking, seeing, hearing, walking, running, and facial expression. They can be capable of anything we are
capable of. But they are not self-aware. They have no SCEs. And they have no spirit and soul. Without spirit and
soul, a robot will remain a tool of human beings. It has no initiative to “explore the unknowns” and “dominate
the world”. Such a tool by nature inherently has no threat to the humanity.
But it does not mean a tool will have no threat to us at all. The safety of a tool is dependent on who makes
the tool and who uses the tool. Supersmart robot is a tool of humans, which can be used constructively or
destructively. People wishfully intend to restrain the research for destructive applications. But if some “bad guys”
designed and manufactured harmful robots, then good guys must react to do the “counter-research” even it is
against their kind wills. That is the “law of following-the-evil”, as it is called. Validity of “law of following-theevil” is showed in developments of nuclear power, cloning technology, and stem-cell research, in addition to AI
robots.
Robots without self-consciousness will remain a tool of humans. Its usefulness or harmfulness is up to the
designers and users of the tool. How much robots will be threatening human beings is not determined by the
robots, but by the humans who make and control the robots.
Kurzweil’s Singularity Is Not a Singularity
Futurist Ray Kurzweil predicted that the “technological singularity” was near (Kurzweil, 2005). His
“singularity” referred to the uncontrollable machine intelligence which surpassed human beings thousands of
times and became the most capable life form on Earth. By that time, machines think and learn so quickly that
biological humans cannot follow and comprehend. Moreover, intelligent machines can improve themselves
without human’s help. Enhancing machine intelligence will thus form a self-reinforced loop of positive-feedback
by which robots make smarter robots by themselves, causing an “explosion of intelligence”. The self-reinforced
explosion will necessarily lead to exponentially improved computer intelligence that will soon dominate the earth
and whole universe. That’s Kurzweil’s singularity. He predicted that the singularity would happen as early as
2045.

76

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

Kurzweil’s singularity stems from the fact of accelerated computing speed up to now. Since 1950’s,
computer speed has been doubled every two years, which almost matches what Moore’s Law predicted (Moore,
1965). Moore’s law indicates an exponential increase of computing speed. Computer intelligence, proportional
to computing speed, has thus improved with the similar rate in the past years. Kurzweil believes the exponential
improvement will continue for a long time. After Moore’s Law stops due to the limit of number of atoms on a
chip, there will be other forms of computing to pick up the rate.
Kurzweil’s singularity assumes that computer will be intelligent enough so as to keep improving itself
initiatively. This assumption is not true. Self-awareness is unachievable by computer intelligence, as we have
reasoned. Without self-awareness, computer would have no SCEs and no the internal drive for improving itself
and exploring the unknowns. Human beings with self-consciousness would remain the initiators of any new
research projects for the improvement of machine intelligence. How far and how fast machine intelligence will
go are ultimately dependent on humans who are imperfect and of limited intelligence. Computer intelligence will
not “fly off the handle” to conquer the universe. Kurzweil’s “singularity” is an unrealistic illusion. It is not a
singularity at all.

Final Remarks
Robots will never achieve the full range of human intelligence because they do not have human’s selfawareness and SCEs. What AI will achieve is just a highly intelligent tool, instead of a self-sufficient species.
We are not making a new species of AI on top of the varieties of species already created by the supernature or
God. Trying to play God to make a new species of AI is a bold but unrealistic dream.
Technology has been advanced with an explosive rate during the past two hundred years. Imaginations have
turned to reality. Miracles have become routines. Stronger than any time in human history, we now regard
ourselves as the juggernaut of the world, of the earth, and even of the universe. The singularity of AI warns us
about the limit of our knowledge and capabilities. For those filled with fanatic zeal of dominating the world with
man-made intelligence, the singularity of AI reminds them of the humble role of humans in the Nature.

References
Gardner, J. (2007). The intelligent universe—AI, ET, and the emerging mind of the cosmos. Wayne: The Career Press.
Gilder, G., & Richards, J. (2002). Are we spiritual machines? The beginning of debate. In J. Richards (Ed.), Are we spiritual
machine?—Ray Kurzweil vs. the critics of strong AI (p. 11). Seattle, Washington: Discovery Institute Press.
Hawking, S. (2014). Artificial intelligence may end mankind. Retrieved from http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540
Hawking, S. (2015). An open letter, research priorities for robust and beneficial artificial intelligence. Retrieved from
https://futureoflife.org/2015/10/27/ai-open-letter/
Hawkins, J., & Blakeslee, S. (2004). On intelligence. New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Hofstadter, D. R., & Godel, E. (1999). Bach—An eternal golden braid. New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Joy, B. (2000). Why the future doesn’t need us? Wired. Retrieved from http://www.wired.com/2000/04/joy-2/
Kurzweil, R. (1999). The age of spiritual machines—When computers exceed human intelligence. New York: Penguin Books.
Kurzweil, R. (2005). The singularity is near—When humans transcend biology. New York: Penguin Books.
Kurzweil, R. (2013). How to create a mind—The secret of human thought revealed. New York: Penguin Books.
Minsky, M. (1986). The society of mind. New York: Touchstone, Simon & Schuster.
Moore, G. E. (1965). Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Electronics, 38(8).
Penrose, R. (1999). The emperor’s new mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Searle, J. (1997). The mystery of consciousness. New York: The New York Review of Books.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2004). Putting the self into self-conscious emotions: A theoretical model. Psychological Inquiry,
15(2), 103-125.

SELF-AWARENESS, A SINGULARITY OF AI

77

Turing, A. (1950). Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind, 59, 433-466.
Wang, J. C. (2016). Is subjective self-identity programmable? International Journal of Artificial Intelligence, 14, 41-52.
Wang, J. C. (2018). Self-Conscious Emotions (SCEs) and their achievability on robots. Proceedings of Annual Conference of
Decision Science Institute, Chicago, IL. Nov. 17-19, 2018. Retrieved from https://decisionsciences.org/wpcontent/uploads/2018/12/dsi-2018-proceedings.pdf
Wang, J. C. (2019). Regarding constituents of subjective-self. Journal of Philosophy Study, 9(4), 171-180.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A new kind of science. Champaign: Wolfram Media, Inc.

